Full financial inclusion will come slowly for a community often referred to as the “ fastest-growing minority group in the world . ”
The task for activists , advocates , enlightened business leaders , and policymakers is to highlight the social and economic benefits of success .
Surgery for All
BOSTON – On a recent trip to India , I hailed a rickshaw that was pedaled , I soon noticed , by a man with a lame leg .
It turns out that a few weeks earlier , the driver had been hit by a car while navigating the busy streets of New Delhi .
Although he had managed to obtain medication from a local pharmacy for the agonizing pain – probably because his leg was broken – he could spare neither the time nor the money to see a surgeon .
This type of tragic calculus is strikingly common .
The Lancet Commission on Global Surgery estimates that some five billion people – almost 70 % of the world ’ s population – lack access to safe , affordable surgical and anesthetic care , while 33 million people are saddled with unbearably high health expenses .
Not surprisingly , the global poor suffer disproportionately : while low-income countries are home to close to 35 % of humanity , they account for just 3.5 % of all surgical procedures .
One of the biggest obstacles to achieving universal health coverage – which the United Nations has declared a global goal – is financing .
And , paradoxical as it may sound , one of the best ways that governments can get the money they need to expand coverage is by making surgery more widely available .
Time-sensitive health problems – such as injuries from traffic accidents and pregnancy-related complications – are among the leading causes of death and disability in low- and middle-income countries .
But untreated or undertreated conditions requiring surgery also hurt economic productivity .
For example , the Lancet study estimated that the failure to improve surgical care in developing countries would translate into $ 12.3 trillion of lost economic output by 2030 .
Failure to maintain strong surgical capacity could even undercut economic gains made by middle-income countries , reducing total GDP growth by approximately 2 % annually .
For many leaders , the common perception is that provision of surgical care is not sustainable or cost-effective .
When faced with tough budget choices , governments often favor programs that combat infectious and chronic diseases , leaving people like my rickshaw driver in the lurch .
But a growing body of evidence suggests that these views are misplaced .
When researchers at the Harvard Medical School analyzed surgical interventions in low- and middle-income countries , they found a remarkable disconnect between economic assumptions and reality .
For example , they calculated that money spent on cesarean sections and joint surgeries yields higher returns than spending on the management of HIV or heart disease .
To be sure , chronic and infectious diseases need our attention , too ; we cannot restructure health systems overnight , nor should we turn our backs on those being treated for non-surgical illnesses .
But reforms that focus more attention on the importance of surgery would boost economic productivity and help create more equitable health care for everyone .
For starters , health ministries and physician organizations should formally recognize that surgical and anesthetic care are an essential part of universal health coverage .
To make this case , health-care providers will need to improve their collection and analysis of data on surgical outcomes , which would increase transparency on mortality and morbidity and strengthen overall accountability .
Decisions about how to expand services could be guided by the Lancet commission ’ s core indicators on “ preparedness , ” “ delivery , ” and “ impact ” of surgical care .
Second , to pool risk and guard against cost overruns , countries that are considering universal coverage policies should put surgical care under publicly financed plans .
While some funding for expanding surgical services could come from taxation , health-care providers should also explore innovative financing options – such as “ social justice models , ” whereby people pay according to their means .
Finally , to streamline resources and increase surgical capacity , hospitals should explore task-sharing , whereby non-emergency cases are referred to licensed nurses and physician assistants .
Longer-term strategies include investing more in medical education to bolster the ranks of doctors and surgeons .
The tremendous economic progress that many developing countries have made in recent decades has been largely driven by vibrant , young , and ambitious populations .
One of the most effective ways to maintain this growth and development is to ensure access to safe and affordable healthcare – including surgery .
While the cost of providing it may be high , the cost of not providing it is even higher .
Polluters Must Pay
NEW YORK – When BP and its drilling partners caused the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 , the United States government demanded that BP finance the cleanup , compensate those who suffered damages , and pay criminal penalties for the violations that led to the disaster .
BP has already committed more than $ 20 billion in remediation and penalties .
Based on a settlement last week , BP will now pay the largest criminal penalty in US history – $ 4.5 billion .
The same standards for environmental cleanup need to be applied to global companies operating in poorer countries , where their power has typically been so great relative to that of governments that many act with impunity , wreaking havoc on the environment with little or no accountability .
As we enter a new era of sustainable development , impunity must turn to responsibility .
Polluters must pay , whether in rich or poor countries .
Major companies need to accept responsibility for their actions .
Nigeria has been Exhibit A of corporate environmental impunity .
For decades , major oil companies , including Shell , ExxonMobil , and Chevron , have been producing oil in the Niger Delta , an ecologically fragile environment of freshwater swamp forests , mangroves , lowland rainforests , and coastal barrier islands .
This rich habitat supports remarkable biodiversity – or did before the oil companies got there – and more than 30 million local inhabitants , who depend on the local ecosystems for their health and livelihoods .
Twenty years ago , the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classified the Niger Delta as a region of high biodiversity of marine and coastal flora and fauna – tree species , fish , birds , and mammals , among other forms of life – and therefore rated it as a very high priority for conservation .
Yet it also noted that the region ’ s biodiversity was under massive threat , with little or no protection .
The global companies operating in the delta have spilled oil and flared natural gas for decades , without regard for the natural environment and the communities impoverished and poisoned by their actions .
One estimate puts the cumulative spills over the past 50 years at approximately 10 million barrels – twice the size of the BP spill .
The data are uncertain : there have been many thousands of spills during this period – often poorly documented and their magnitude hidden or simply unmeasured by either the companies or the government .
Indeed , just as BP was being hit with new criminal penalties , ExxonMobil announced yet another pipeline leak in the Niger Delta .
The environmental destruction of the delta is part of a larger saga : corrupt companies operating hand in hand with corrupt government officials .
The companies routinely bribe officials to gain oil leases , lie about output , evade taxes , and dodge responsibility for the environmental damage that they cause .
Nigerian officials have become fabulously wealthy , owing to decades of payoffs by international companies that have plundered the delta ’ s natural wealth .
Shell , the largest foreign operator in the Niger Delta , has been criticized repeatedly for its egregious practices and its unwillingness to be held to account .
Meanwhile , the local population has remained impoverished and beset by diseases caused by unsafe air , poisoned drinking water , and pollution in the food chain .
Local lawlessness has led to gang warfare and persistent illegal tapping into the pipelines to steal oil , leading to further massive oil spills and frequent explosions that kill dozens , including innocent bystanders .
In the colonial era , it was the official purpose of imperial power to extract wealth from the administered territories .
In the post-colonial period , the methods are better disguised .
When oil companies misbehave in Nigeria or elsewhere , they are protected by the power of their home countries .
Don ’ t mess with the companies , they are told by the United States and Europe .
Indeed , one of the largest bribes ( a reputed $ 180 million ) paid in recent times in Nigeria was by Halliburton , a company tightly intertwined with US political power .
( Dick Cheney went from being Halliburton ’ s CEO to the US vice presidency . )
Last year , the United Nations Environment Program ( UNEP ) issued a remarkable report on Ogoniland , a major ethnic homeland in the Niger Delta that has been at the epicenter of conflict between local communities and international oil .
The report was as scathing as it was scientifically clear .
Despite many past promises of a cleanup , Ogoniland remains in environmental agony , impoverished and sickened by the oil industry .
UNEP also offered clear and detailed recommendations , including emergency measures to ensure safe drinking water ; cleanup activities targeting the mangroves and soils ; public-health studies to identify and counteract the consequences of pollution ; and a new regulatory framework .
The world ’ s governments have recently agreed to move to a new framework for sustainable development , declaring their intention to adopt Sustainable Development Goals at the Rio + 20 Summit in June .
The SDGs offer a critical opportunity for the world to set clear , compelling standards for government and corporate behavior .
Many major companies , including in the oil industry , have expressed their readiness to support sustainable development goals .
Cleaning up the Niger Delta would provide the strongest possible example of a new age of accountability .
Shell , Chevron , ExxonMobil , and other major oil companies should step forward and help to fund the necessary cleanup , ushering in a new era of responsibility .
The Nigerian government ’ s own accountability is on the line as well .
It is heartening that several Nigerian senators have recently been in the forefront of efforts to strengthen the rule of law in the oil sector .
The cleanup of the Niger Delta provides an ideal opportunity for Nigeria , the oil industry , and the international community to show convincingly that a new age has dawned .
From now on , sustainable development must not be a mere slogan , but rather an operational approach to global governance and well-being on a strained and crowded planet .
Remembering Sri Lanka ’ s Killing Fields
NEW YORK – One of the worst atrocity crime stories of recent decades has barely registered in the world ’ s collective conscience .
We remember and acknowledge the shame of Cambodia , Rwanda , Bosnia , and Darfur .
We agonize about the failure to halt the atrocities being committed almost daily in Syria .
But , at least until now , the world has paid almost no attention to war crimes and crimes against humanity comparable in their savagery to any of these : the killing fields of Sri Lanka in 2009 .
Three years ago , in the bloody endgame of the Sri Lankan government ’ s war against the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , some 300,000 civilians became trapped between the advancing army and the last LTTE fighters in what has been called “ the cage ” – a tiny strip of land , not much larger than New York City ’ s Central Park , between sea and lagoon in the northeast of the country .
With both sides showing neither restraint nor compassion , at least 10,000 civilians – possibly as many as 40,000 – died in the carnage that followed , as a result of indiscriminate army shelling , rebel gunfire , and denial of food and medical supplies .
The lack of outrage mainly reflects the Sri Lankan government ’ s success in embedding in the minds of policymakers and publics an alternative narrative that had extraordinary worldwide resonance in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 .
What occurred in the cage , according to this narrative , was the long-overdue defeat , by wholly necessary and defensible means , of a murderous terrorist insurrection that had threatened the country ’ s very existence .
The other key reason behind the world ’ s silence is that the Sri Lankan government was relentless in banning independent observers – media , NGOs , or diplomats – from witnessing or reporting on its actions .
And this problem was compounded by the timidity of in-country United Nations officials in communicating such information as they had .
President Mahinda Rajapaksa ’ s government claimed throughout , and still does , that it maintained a “ zero civilian casualties ” policy .
Officials argued that no heavy artillery fire was ever directed at civilians or hospitals , that any collateral injury to civilians was minimal , and that they fully respected international law , including the proscription against execution of captured prisoners .
But that narrative is now being picked apart in a series of recent publications , notably the report last year of a UN Panel of Experts , and in two new books : UN official Gordon Weiss ’ s relentlessly analytical The Cage : The Fight for Sri Lanka and the Last Days of the Tamil Tigers , and BBC journalist Frances Harrison ’ s harrowingly anecdotal Still Counting the Dead : Survivors of Sri Lanka ’ s Hidden War .
Nobody underplays the LTTE ’ s contribution to the 2009 savagery ; but , with the Tigers ’ leaders all dead , international attention should now be focused overwhelmingly on holding the government accountable for its failure to accept its responsibility to protect its own people .
For far too long , Rajapaska ’ s government has been evading accountability with an endless stream of diversionary maneuvers ( usually involving committees of inquiry intended to lead nowhere , and duly complying ) , denial of physical access , outright dissimulation , and relentless verbal intimidation of anyone daring to question it .
Real international pressure is at last being placed on the government to explain its actions , most significantly by the much-maligned UN Human Rights Council in Geneva , which will consider Sri Lanka ’ s response in March 2013 .
In doing so , it is likely to be armed with a full brief of evidence of war crimes and crimes against humanity now being compiled from eyewitness accounts by the Australian-based International Crimes Evidence Project .
One of the most tragic aspects of the whole story , just now emerging , is the failure of UN officials on the ground to publicize at the time , when it really mattered , credible information that would have undercut the government ’ s narrative .
Specific estimates of casualties in the combat area were compiled by a UN team in Colombo from early 2009 , based on regular radiophone contact with a handful of reliable sources – NGO , medical , and local UN Tamil staff – still on the ground .
The information was incomplete , but it was solid – and alarming .
But an institutional decision was taken not to use this information on the grounds that it could not be “ verified . ”
The real reasons are now emerging .
In part , the UN team wanted to keep humanitarian assistance lines open .
The team was also subjected to shameless verbal bullying by Sri Lankan officials ( a deeply unpleasant experience to which I , too , have been subjected ) .
The team ’ s members also knew that Sri Lanka ’ s government had wide support among UN member states , and that the LTTE had none at all .
But , as the Lakhdar Brahimi Panel concluded a decade ago , after reviewing some of the catastrophic failures of peace processes in the 1990 ’ s , the responsibility of the UN Secretariat must be to tell the UN Security Council what it needs to hear , not what it wants to hear .
An internal review panel studying what went wrong in the UN system ’ s response to Sri Lanka , commissioned by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and headed by the distinguished diplomat Charles Petrie , is due to report to Ban next month .
All indications are that it will not be a pretty story .
It is crucial that its findings be made public and acted upon .
Selective memory is a defense mechanism with which we are all familiar .
For governments and international organizations , as with individuals , moral failure is easier to live with if we can pretend that it never happened .
But mass atrocity crimes did happen in Sri Lanka , there was moral default all around , and if we do not learn from this past , we will indeed be condemned to repeat it .
Saving Capitalism from Economics 101
WASHINGTON , DC – All across the United States , students are settling into college – and coming to grips with “ Econ 101 . ”
This introductory course is typically taught with a broadly reassuring message : if markets are allowed to work , good outcomes – such as productivity growth , increasing wages , and generally shared prosperity – will surely follow .
Unfortunately , as my co-author James Kwak points out in his recent book , Economism : Bad Economics and the Rise of Inequality , Econ 101 is so far from being the whole story that it could actually be considered misleading – at least as a guide to sensible policymaking .
Markets can be good , but they are also profoundly susceptible to abusive practices , including by prominent private-sector people .
This is not a theoretical concern ; it is central to our current policy debates , including important new US legislation that has just been put forward .
One core problem is that market incentives reward self-interested private behavior , without accounting for social benefits or costs .
We generally overlook our actions ’ spillover effects on others , or “ externalities . ”
To be fair , Econ 101 textbooks do discuss this issue in some contexts , such as pollution , and it is widely accepted that environmental damage needs to be regulated if we are to have clean air , clean water , and limits on other pollutants .
Unfortunately , “ widely accepted ” does not include by President Donald Trump ’ s administration , which is busy rolling back environmental protections across a broad range of activities .
The New York Times counts 76 rollbacks in progress .
The thinking behind this policy is straight out of the first few weeks of Econ 101 : get out of the way of the market .
As a result , there is a lot more pollution – including more emission of greenhouse gases – in America ’ s future .
There is also an even deeper problem .
There is a general presumption in Econ 101 that firms should maximize profits , and that this is best for their shareholders and for society .
But this notion of “ firms ” is just a shorthand for people organized in a particular form .
People , not firms , make decisions .
To understand the nature and impact of these decisions , we need to look closely at the incentives of firms ’ senior managers and board members .
Since the 1970s , the people who run firms have become much more focused on increasing their compensation , through bonuses , stock options , and the like .
There has been a significant rise in the value of shares , most of which are owned by the wealthiest 10 % of Americans .
At the same time , median wages have barely increased – a dramatic change from the immediate post-World War II period , when productivity increases led to steady wage gains .
Today , it is top managers and members of boards of directors in whose interest firms are run .
Investors sometimes get a good ride , though there are plenty of instances where insiders take excessive advantage by awarding themselves overly generous compensation , taking on excessive risk , or engaging in other , more devious practices .
The idea that compensation committees insist on genuinely impressive performance , relative to relevant benchmarks , has become risible .
This is the context in which Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is proposing a new Accountable Capitalism Act .
Very large companies would need to acquire a federal charter ( as opposed to the current state charter arrangements ) , which would come with specific obligations – in particular , the need to consider the interests of all corporate stakeholders , including workers .
To make this more meaningful and generally improve transparency , ordinary ( non-management ) employees should get some representation on the board of directors .
This type of arrangement works well in Germany , a country where workers continue to be treated with respect .
Warren also supports a proposal that originated from John Bogle , founder of Vanguard ( a mutual fund company ) , that would require super-majority support from shareholders and directors before a large company could engage in political expenditures .
The underlying legal theory behind these proposals is sound , and it is well articulated in a letter signed by Robert Hockett of Cornell Law School and other distinguished figures .
Large corporations are granted significant rights , including limited liability for individual executives , and facilitate the pooling of large amounts of capital from people who do not necessarily know one another ( or the promoters of the company ) .
Originally , the purpose was to enable the private sector to carry out large-scale risky investments that had broader potential impact , such as building canals and railroads .
The US supposedly constrains the activities of large corporations , with the Department of Justice taking action if companies acquire monopoly power or otherwise behave in an anti-competitive manner .
Realistically , the enforcement of antitrust law has slipped a long way in recent years , under both Republican and Democratic administrations .
Warren is proposing a much broader rethink .
Large corporations can still do well , but they need to be held accountable in a much more transparent way .
Incentives for executives would be adjusted , and running these companies would no longer be so much about lining their own pockets .
Workers would no longer be treated so badly , and more people might even start to believe again in the American Dream of prosperity for all .
The legitimacy of capitalism – private ownership and reliance on market mechanisms – would be greatly strengthened under the Accountable Capitalism Act .
So , yes , like it or not , this will be on the final exam .
Accounting for Gaza
New York – This week the United Nations Human Rights Council will debate the report of the fact-finding mission led by Judge Richard Goldstone on human rights violations in the Gaza conflict .
Let us hope it is a full and fair examination based on the report ’ s findings and recommendations .
Goldstone and his team concluded that both Israel and Hamas , the Palestinian group controlling Gaza , committed war crimes and possibly crimes against humanity during the period of the conflict which the investigation addressed . The report calls for credible investigations of alleged rights violations and recommends that the UN Security Council require both sides to report back within six months on the results , including any prosecutions they will carry out in connection with the violations identified .
Failure to do so , in the view of Goldstone ’ s commission , should result in the Security Council referring the matter to the prosecutor for the International Criminal Court in The Hague .
Unfortunately , rather than debating Goldstone ’ s detailed findings and the merits of his recommendations on ways to move forward , there are indications that governments may focus instead on the process leading up to the investigation and seek to limit full discussion of the report .
As someone involved in that process , I feel it is important to put my views on record , as comments I made previously are now being used as part of the effort to undermine Judge Goldstone and his important work .
I refused to accept the invitation from the president of the Human Rights Council at the time , Ambassador Martin Uhomoibhi of Nigeria , to lead the investigation following the Human Rights Council ’ s January 12 , 2009 resolution . As a former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , I felt strongly that the Council ’ s resolution was one-sided and did not permit a balanced approach to determining the situation on the ground .
It referred only to “ the grave violations of human rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territory , particularly due to the recent Israeli military attacks , ” and called for a mission to investigate “ all violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law by the occupying power , Israel , against the Palestinian people . ”
I was also aware that the UN Human Rights Council had made repeated condemnations of Israel over the past two years but had focused little attention on large-scale violations of human rights in other countries .
This pattern of action and inaction by the Council has given greater credence to those who believe the UN ’ s highest human rights body is inherently anti-Israel .
I decided I could not undertake the mission for these reasons .
I am aware that Judge Goldstone , a dedicated and unimpeachable human rights lawyer and advocate , shared similar concerns when he was initially approached .
But he was able to work with the Council ’ s president to secure an agreement he felt confident would permit the mandate to be interpreted in such a way as to allow his team to address the actions taken by both parties to the conflict .
Experts can debate whether this was in conformity with UN rules and procedures .
I have no doubt that those involved were seeking a way forward that would allow for a full investigation and help overcome the political divisiveness currently undermining the Human Rights Council within the UN system .
The question now is whether governments will give Judge Goldstone ’ s findings the serious attention they deserve , or instead fall back into an overtly political posture .
As Goldstone &apos;s report makes clear :
Both the Palestinians and the Israelis are legitimately angered at the lives that they are forced to lead : For the Palestinians , the anger about individual events – the civilian casualties , injuries and destruction in Gaza following from military attacks , the blockade , the continued construction of the Wall outside of the 1967 borders – feed into an underlying anger about the continuing Israeli occupation , its daily humiliations and their as-yet-unfulfilled right to self-determination .
For the Israelis , the public statements of Palestinian armed groups celebrating rocket and mortar attacks on civilians strengthen a deep-rooted concern that negotiation will yield little and that their nation remains under existential threat from which only it can protect its people .
In this way , both the Israelis and the Palestinians share a secret fear – for some , a belief – that each has no intention of accepting the other ’ s right to a country of their own .
This anger and fear are unfortunately ably represented by many politicians .
( Para .
1705 )
For the sake of human rights and peace in the region , my hope is that the international community will bear witness to these circumstances , consider Judge Goldstone ’ s report in its entirety and press for accountability for the most serious crimes .
Accounting Tricks Around the Globe
Accounting chicanery will be high on the agenda of the bankers who will meet at the annual IMF / World Bank gathering in Washington , D.C. The IMF should do more than offer the private sector advice about how to fix its accounting problems ; governmental accounting tricks and the IMF &apos;s own wheezes should also be addressed , says Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz .
The Arthur Anderson and Enron scandals in America have focused attention on the problems of accounting in private businesses .
But the scale of this corruption should not blind us to the problem of public sector accounting , where many deceitful things are also being done .
Accounting rules are designed to provide standardized frameworks within which the financial position of a firm , or government , can be assessed .
Bad accounting frameworks always lead to bad information , and bad information leads to bad decisions , with serious long term consequences .
This is true in the public as well as the private sector .
America &apos;s business scandals showed how accounting rules can be bent and abused to provide a misleading picture of what is really happening in a company .
The Bush Administration , not to be left behind , has shown how public accounting rules can be bent so as to provide a misleading picture of what is really happening in a national economy .
Indeed , last year saw what may be the largest accounting fraud ever conducted , as a mega-surplus of more than $ 3trillion for the years 2002 to 2011 was transformed into a $ 2 trillion deficit .
Investors in Enron waited years before discovering that something was amiss .
Though sudden and vast , the change in America &apos;s fiscal stance already provides a clear inkling that something was amiss .
It will be years before the full magnitude of President Bush &apos;s deception is apparent .
Meanwhile , the Bush Administration will blame the sinking economy , bad luck , and unintentional miscalculations for the vanished surplus .
But America is not alone in allowing for official accounting shenanigans .
In Latin America and elsewhere in the developing world , the IMF imposes accounting frameworks that not only make little sense , but result in excessive austerity .
In some of the poorest countries in the world - ie , those most dependent on aid - the IMF has argued that foreign aid should not be listed as revenue in a government &apos;s budget calculations .
But what else is aid if it is not revenue ?
The IMF &apos;s argument seems to be this : a country cannot rely on foreign aid because aid is too unstable .
The truth , of course , is that aid is more stable than tax revenues in poor countries .
By the IMF &apos;s logic , neither aid nor tax revenues should be included in budgets .
If that is the case , every country in the world is in deep trouble .
The absurdity here is the idea that all foreign aid should be added to reserves .
But donor countries want to see the money they give to finance schools or health clinics spent on schools and health clinics ; they don &apos;t want to see it added to a nation &apos;s reserves .
Governments in developing countries have the correct answer to the problem of revenue instability : expenditure flexibility .
Build schools when you have aid ; stop building them when you don &apos;t .
For years , World Bank economists have tried to convince the IMF to see this logic , with little progress .
Other IMF accounting practices , including how the capital expenditures of government-owned enterprises are treated , are also causing outrage .
If a state owned enterprise in Latin America wants to borrow to make an investment , in Latin America such borrowing is treated as an addition to the deficit .
Investors , worried about the size of a government deficit , see only the bottom line .
But if a company can buy a $ 1 billion asset for $ 500 million , economic logic says buy the asset .
The balance sheet is improved by $ 500 million .
But by IMF logic , all you see in the accounts is increased expenditure and borrowing , not the value of the acquired asset .
Because of this rule , investors may only see an apparent worsening of the country &apos;s fiscal position , and so may demand higher interest rates .
Of course , foreign investors like this IMF logic : government corporations are put at a distinct disadvantage : their ability to invest inhibited , these firms cannot compete to make acquisitions .
A second IMF accounting distortion involves stabilization funds .
These are national funds that , in boom years , receive revenues from sales of natural resources to be set aside against a rainy day .
This makes sense .
But IMF accounting inhibits the use of these funds to help stabilize an economy through counter-cyclical fiscal spending .
According to Mexican and Chilean officials I have discussed the matter with , spending from a stabilization fund is reportedly treated as if the country is borrowing , thus adding to its deficit .
It is , of course , in times of economic downturn that countries worry most about their credit rating , so the IMF stance is particularly unhelpful .
IMF accounting frameworks , rather than providing useful signals to the market , provide distorted information that exacerbates a troubled country &apos;s problems .
Good decisions require accurate information , and this comes only through good accounting frameworks .
Of course , no perfect accounting framework exists , but some frameworks systematically distort .
Indeed , a hidden agenda often exists in the choice of an accounting framework .
Not including stock options inside the accounting framework served US corporate interests , and those of individual bosses , well .
The IMF &apos;s distorted and unfair accounting frameworks may also serve a hidden purpose : to force governments to shrink expenditures .
But there are high economic and social costs to this agenda , one that goes far beyond the IMF &apos;s mandate .
A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold
CAMBRIDGE – With youth unemployment touching 50 % in eurozone countries such as Spain and Greece , is a generation being sacrificed for the sake of a single currency that encompasses too diverse a group of countries to be sustainable ?
If so , does enlarging the euro ’ s membership really serve Europe ’ s apparent goal of maximizing economic integration without necessarily achieving full political union ?
The good news is that economic research does have a few things to say about whether Europe should have a single currency .
The bad news is that it has become increasingly clear that , at least for large countries , currency areas will be highly unstable unless they follow national borders .
At a minimum , currency unions require a confederation with far more centralized power over taxation and other policies than European leaders envision for the eurozone .
What of Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell ’ s famous 1961 conjecture that national and currency borders need not significantly overlap ?
In his provocative American Economic Review paper “ A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas , ” Mundell argued that as long as workers could move within a currency region to where the jobs were , the region could afford to forgo the equilibrating mechanism of exchange-rate adjustment .
He credited another ( future ) Nobel Prize winner , James Meade , for having recognized the importance of labor mobility in earlier work , but criticized Meade for interpreting the idea too stringently , especially in the context of Europe ’ s nascent integration .
Mundell did not emphasize financial crises , but presumably labor mobility is more important today than ever .
Not surprisingly , workers are leaving the eurozone ’ s crisis countries , but not necessarily for its stronger northern region .
Instead , Portuguese workers are fleeing to booming former colonies such as Brazil and Macau .
Irish workers are leaving in droves to Canada , Australia , and the United States .
Spanish workers are streaming into Romania , which until recently had been a major source of agricultural labor in Spain .
Still , if intra-eurozone mobility were anything like Mundell ’ s ideal , today we would not be seeing 25 % unemployment in Spain while Germany ’ s unemployment rate is below 7 % .
Later writers came to recognize that there are other essential criteria for a successful currency union , which are difficult to achieve without deep political integration .
Peter Kenen argued in the late 1960 ’ s that without exchange-rate movements as a shock absorber , a currency union requires fiscal transfers as a way to share risk .
For a normal country , the national income-tax system constitutes a huge automatic stabilizer across regions .
In the US , when oil prices go up , incomes in Texas and Montana rise , which means that these states then contribute more tax revenue to the federal budget , thereby helping out the rest of the country .
Europe , of course , has no significant centralized tax authority , so this key automatic stabilizer is essentially absent .
Some European academics tried to argue that there was no need for US-like fiscal transfers , because any desired degree of risk sharing can , in theory , be achieved through financial markets .
This claim was hugely misguided .
Financial markets can be fragile , and they provide little capacity for sharing risk related to labor income , which constitutes the largest part of income in any advanced economy .
Kenen was mainly concerned with short-term transfers to smooth out cyclical bumpiness .
But , in a currency union with huge differences in income and development levels , the short term can stretch out for a very long time .
Many Germans today rightly feel that any system of fiscal transfers will morph into a permanent feeding tube , much the way that northern Italy has been propping up southern Italy for the last century .
Indeed , more than 20 years on , Western Germans still see no end in sight for the bills from German unification .
Later , Maurice Obstfeld pointed out that , in addition to fiscal transfers , a currency union needs clearly defined rules for the lender of last resort .
Otherwise , bank runs and debt panics will be rampant .
Obstfeld had in mind a bailout mechanism for banks , but it is now abundantly clear that one also needs a lender of last resort and a bankruptcy mechanism for states and municipalities .
A logical corollary of the criteria set forth by Kenen and Obstfeld , and even of Mundell ’ s labor-mobility criterion , is that currency unions cannot survive without political legitimacy , most likely involving region-wide popular elections .
Europe ’ s leaders cannot carry out large transfers across countries indefinitely without a coherent European political framework .
European policymakers today often complain that , were it not for the US financial crisis , the eurozone would be doing just fine .
Perhaps they are right .
But any financial system must be able to withstand shocks , including big ones .
Europe may never be an “ optimum ” currency area by any standard .
But , without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade .
A Century of Chinese Protests
The Global Economy ’ s New Path
WASHINGTON , DC – Whether we like it or not , the world around us is in a state of constant change .
But recent economic trends suggest that this change may be shifting its direction in a fundamental way .
Consider the advanced economies .
During the last two decades , economic growth in these countries was led by consumption – so much so that economic activity in these economies swung from investment to consumption by a total of 10 percentage points of GDP .
As a result , in 2010 the share of consumption in their GDP had reached 81.6 % .
1990
2010
( In percent of GDP )
Advanced economies
Consumption
76.4
81.6
Investment
23.7
18.4
Emerging and developing economies
Consumption
73.4
67.1
Investment
26.0
30.8
Meanwhile , emerging markets and developing economies provided almost a mirror image of this trend , raising their investment and boosting the supply of goods to the rest of the world at the cost of consumption in their own economies .
By 2010 , the share of consumption in their GDP had declined , from 73.4 % to 67.1 % .
Looking forward , it is unlikely that the consumption share of GDP can increase further in advanced economies .
The main drivers of this increase were primarily financial engineering and wealth effects from strong asset prices .
Neither of these factors currently is at play to push consumption ’ s share of GDP higher .
But can the advanced economies ’ consumption even be sustained at the current level ?
Perhaps not .
Current levels of consumption are associated with over-extended governments and households , whose debt levels remain high , implying that more savings are required .
Banks also need to raise capital .
In general , many economic agents need an extended period of deleveraging .
However , current policies in the major advanced economies are aimed at maintaining current consumption levels in order to support growth and employment .
If the consumption share of GDP nonetheless declines , simple arithmetic tells us that investment and exports need to be higher to maintain total demand .
Should we expect emerging markets and developing economies to pick up the slack ?
To sustain strong growth in these economies as external demand weakens , domestic demand needs to become the major engine of growth .
This means stronger domestic consumption and appropriate levels of investment to support such consumption growth .
In economies where investment levels are leading to excess capacity , resources could shift from investment to consumption , provided that these countries ’ external accounts remain sustainable .
These are major tectonic shifts in the structure of the global economy , and are fraught with potential dangers .
The pace of change will vary between sectors and across economies , leading to mismatches of demand and supply worldwide .
Moreover , with globalization , an economic problem in one part of the world can be transmitted to the rest of the world more strongly , substantially complicating policy responses in both advanced and developing economies .
A study of such spillover effects by the International Monetary Fund suggests that , before the global financial crisis , external factors explained 36 % of change in output in the five systemically important economies ( the eurozone , the United States , China , Japan , and the United Kingdom ) ; after the crisis , however , this share reached close to 60 % .
In the rest of the world , including emerging markets , the share of external factors in output change increased from about 43 % to more than 60 % .
In this environment , we must diligently pursue policy coordination at the global level .
To achieve an orderly realignment of consumption and investment worldwide , policies that boost investment in one part of the world should match policies that boost consumption in other parts .
In particular , advanced economies should implement fundamental productivity-enhancing reforms , the eurozone should strengthen the currency union , and emerging market and developing economies should boost their domestic sources of growth .
And these policies should be consistent with fiscal and external stability .
Moreover , financial-sector policies and regulatory frameworks should be coordinated at the global level , in order to design and implement consensus-based rules – thereby addressing the problems posed by very large , global institutions that are considered too big or too complex to fail .
Only with such global coordination can we reduce , and possibly eliminate , economic instability and disorderly adjustments both at home and abroad , even as we seek to maximize the benefits of the inevitable changes in the global economy .
Achieving a “ Europe of Results ”
BRUSSELS – The tsunami that has swept across financial markets is a global catastrophe .
If handled correctly , however , the crisis may yet raise the esteem of the European Union and its institutions .
The EU ’ s legitimacy problem has two different aspects : apathy , leading to a low turnout in the European parliamentary elections , and outright euro-skepticism .
The voter-turnout problem partly reflects frustration about the present state of the EU , and also people ’ s impression that they can exert little influence by voting one way or the other .
Euro-skepticism , on the other hand , and the looming threat of anti-European populism , is directly linked to the idea that the EU is not merely incapable of offering a solution to the crisis , but in fact is part of the problem .
So , although the EU represents our best hope of ensuring that Europe is internationally competitive in today ’ s increasingly difficult environment , it is actually being blamed for globalization .
Many people confuse these two aspects of the EU ’ s legitimacy problem , and believe that somehow turnout in European elections can be increased by pointing out to people how good and important the EU is .
But in most cases , this is not possible .
At first sight , the easiest answer to the problem of low voter turnout is to give more power to the European Parliament .
But if this was the solution , then we would not have had steadily declining turnouts since the high point of 63 % , at the first elections to the European Parliament in 1979 .
After all , since then the EP ’ s influence and powers of joint decision-making have grown constantly .
The trouble is that , EP elections must be “ about ” something if voters are to be interested , which means they must involve a real choice .
And a real choice requires Europe-wide election campaigns by all parties .
This would also involve making the choice of the European Commission ’ s president dependent on the outcome of the EP elections .
But , in fact , both of these conditions have already been met ; in 2004 , Portuguese Prime Minister José Manuel Durão Barroso was appointed President of the Commission because he came from the political organization with the strongest election result , the European People ’ s Party .
And this year ’ s elections saw a more intensive presence of party organizations at European level than ever before .
Instead , I believe that the most important way to reawaken voters ’ interest in European elections will be to open up the election of the Commission ’ s President to them , and create a genuinely Europe-wide political debate during the next election campaign .
The Euro-skepticism problem can be tackled only if the Union itself starts to perform better , and is seen to be doing so .
That is why in the aftermath of the failed referenda four years ago in France and the Netherlands on the Constitutional treaty , the Commission tried to emphasize the idea of a “ Europe of Results ” that would seek to convince citizens of its worth through concrete achievements .
Given the gravity of the economic crisis , the time has come for the EU to demonstrate its strengths whenever possible .
The aim must be not only to win back the hearts of Europeans who have become skeptical , but also to convince them that the Union is indispensable to meeting the challenges Europeans face .
Europe ’ s citizens understand that the relatively small nation-states that make up the EU are no longer able to face these enormous challenges on their own .
In Ireland , last autumn ’ s financial crisis provoked a turnaround in public opinion about the EU , and even in Iceland , although it lies on the periphery of our continent , membership of the EU and the euro have become a priority .
European countries have become so interconnected that isolated national measures on issues like financial-market regulation are hopeless .
A changing world in which new powers like China and India play an increasingly important role will not wait for Europe to make up its mind .
The EU must instead show leadership through its efforts to solve the world ’ s current problems .
As for the European People ’ s Party , for us the economy is not an end in itself but should serve the people .
The economic crisis was caused by shortsightedness and a lack of control in the global financial system .
Now we must redefine the role of regulators in financial markets and in the wider economy , for we cannot let the financial sector walk off with the profits and leave taxpayers bearing the losses .
That doesn ’ t mean that we are advocating a move to socialism ; we want better and smarter regulation , not regulation for its own sake .
We see five keys to recovery :
A “ Europe of Results ” is achievable .
It can strengthen the EU ’ s legitimacy , though , only if policy recommendations such as these , and the successes that result from implementing them , are communicated clearly and effectively to the general public .
Achieving a US-China Strategic Understanding
ALBERTA – Relations between the United States and China have been at a low point in recent months .
Tensions over US arms sales to Taiwan , President Barack Obama ’ s meeting with the Dalai Lama , disputes over the value of China ’ s currency , a supposed snub of Obama by Chinese leaders at December ’ s Copenhagen climate summit , and the rupture between Google and China have all played a role .
But President Hu Jintao ’ s visit to Washington for the nuclear security summit , which followed a phone conversation between him and Obama , has set the stage for a serious and calm exchange of views on a range of bilateral and international issues , including Iran ’ s nuclear program .
This calming of the diplomatic atmosphere was helped considerably by US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner delaying his
report to Congress on whether or not China is a currency manipulator .
Geithner even made a quick stop in Beijing on April 8 to meet Chinese Vice Premier Wang Qishan , prompting reports that China may let the renminbi float more flexibly .
Nevertheless , before anyone concludes that US-China ties are warming up , it is worth noting that the two countries have starkly different views on how to manage their relationship .
Take the recent Obama-Hu telephone conversation .
Reports in the US following the hour-long exchange praised it as a turning point in bilateral relations , and headlines emphasized that Obama worked on Hu to achieve a common stand in sanctioning Iran over its pursuit of nuclear weapons .
Yet Chinese news releases gave no indication of such a “ breakthrough . ”
Instead , they stressed Hu ’ s demand that the US side “ properly handle ” the Taiwan and Tibet issues , which represent China ’ s “ core interests . ”
There was not even a mention that the two leaders discussed Iran , other than one line saying that they exchanged views on international issues of common concern .
Such discrepancies reflect a broader perception gap .
On the American side , the emerging consensus is that the Obama administration began its term committed to working closely with China on a range of issues .
It took extra steps in not being openly critical of China ’ s currency policy , launched the high-profile US-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue , delayed a meeting with the Dalai Lama prior to Obama ’ s China trip , and showed substantial patience with China ’ s concerns at the Copenhagen conference .
But that conciliatory approach , which brought down on Obama domestic criticism , did not seem to be appreciated by the Chinese .
Instead , China displayed sharp anger at the US arms sale to Taiwan , something that has been going on for decades , and to Obama ’ s low-key meeting with the Dalai Lama .
Many in the Obama administration now ask : what is the point of being nice when there are no obvious benefits ?
On the Chinese side , the initial accommodating approach by Obama , although met with a level of caution and skepticism , was perceived as an inevitable reflection of China ’ s rise and more equal status with the US .
After all , many argue , China continues to buy US treasury bonds and now shoulders the largest amount of US debt , thus financing whatever the Americans are doing , from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan to health-care reform at home .
China has played a vital role in getting the global economy onto a speedier path to recovery , thanks to its effective stimulus package .
China is also expected to help resolve the nuclear standoffs with North Korea and Iran , two counties that are hostile to the US but less of a threat to China .
So China ’ s leaders felt a sense of betrayal when Obama , shortly after his positive visit to Beijing , went ahead with the arms sales to Taiwan and the meeting with the Dalai Lama .
Many mainstream , liberal-minded Chinese academics complain that there is no fresh US approach to China .
Rather , these are old policies that do not accommodate China ’ s new status or respond to “ Chinese kindness . ”
The problem is not a lack of communication channels .
Both countries have interacted with each other for almost four decades .
There are no language problems , few cultural barriers , and plenty of conferences and personal correspondence .
We have seen elegant op-eds written on both sides , more or less articulating how one side is right and the other side wrong .
The end result ?
They talk past each other rather than with each other .
The fundamental issue in today ’ s US-China relations is the strategic visions that both governments are developing to cope with China ’ s rise .
Americans tend to think that what is good for America must be good for the world .
But China – and much of the world , for that matter – may not agree .
Chinese leaders , for their part , tend to believe that nothing matters much if it is not good for China in the first place .
Both countries must acknowledge that they have their own domestic and foreign policy priorities .
Some may be shared ; some not .
Others may conflict .
To accommodate and bridge their different interests , the US and China need to engage in more than just frank discussions .
Tangible strategic concessions from both sides must be made in order to promote cooperation and avoid confrontation .
The Education Roadmap to 2030
LONDON – When I visited the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan earlier this year , I met with children who told me what education means to them .
For Syrian youths who have been forced from their homes and have lost everything , education is about more than qualifications or test scores ; it embodies their hope for the future .
Children like those in Zaatari , and millions of others around the world , are central to the work of the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity , which I joined last September .
This commission is committed to the fourth United Nations Sustainable Development Goal , which aims , by 2030 , to “ ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all . ”
This goal is still a distant prospect for far too many children .
With so many development issues demanding our attention , policymakers should bear in mind that education is not just a good in itself ; it is also a catalyst for many other development gains .
As the old African proverb goes , if you educate a girl , you educate an entire nation .
Ensuring access to quality education for children , especially girls , will lead to fewer child marriages and less child labor and exploitation .
And education has long-term societal benefits : aside from increased political engagement , educated children contribute intellectual capital and pursue entrepreneurial opportunities when they grow up , boosting economic growth .
Tackling the education challenge needs to start from two principles embedded in the goal .
First , “ for all ” means that we must focus on the children who have been left behind .
Millions of children are out of school or are receiving a substandard education because of who they are or where they live .
According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , refugee children are five times more likely to be out of school than other children in the countries to which they ’ ve been displaced .
And in all but two African countries , girls remain less likely than boys to complete a primary education .
Getting these children into school will require new approaches that directly address their exclusion and make schooling genuinely accessible and relevant .
Second , “ quality ” : Education must be effective , so that children actually learn .
For the 61 million children who are out of primary school , formal education is beyond reach .
But , just as urgently , more than one-third of children of primary-school age – 250 million – are not learning the basics , according to the UNESCO Education for All Global Monitoring Report .
Half of these children have been in school for at least four years .
We must address the barriers to learning , both in the classroom and at home , by improving the quality of teaching and classroom conditions and teaching parents how they can support their children ’ s education .
Upholding these two principles will require increased investment .
Last year , UNESCO calculated that governments must double education spending as a share of national income to achieve the 2030 goals .
This will require increased revenue from taxation and stronger efforts to collect what ’ s owed .
Donors also need to live up to their aid commitments and target aid more effectively .
For example , less than one-third of education aid goes to Africa , even though the region accounts for almost two-thirds of out-of-school children .
Moreover , at the moment , education budgets are often regressive , with almost half of spending in the poorest countries allocated to the most educated 10 % of the population .
Fixing education investment requires action in two key areas .
First , we need equitable financing , with more investment in early childhood care and development , where there is the biggest potential for returns .
Budgets must be focused on the most excluded children , and primary education must be free at the point of use , so that every child can learn .
We also urgently need more transparency and accountability , so that budgets are visible and communities have a say in school governance .
Second , we need to strengthen domestic education systems so that governments see themselves as the guarantor of accessible , quality schools for their citizens , rather than abdicating that role to outside development agencies .
In particular , we should push for partnerships between government and business to boost domestic resources for education , and eliminate illicit capital flows that deprive governments of the means to fund it , such as tax evasion and money laundering across national borders .
With these priorities in mind , the education commission will deliver its recommendations at the UN General Assembly on September 18 , when the Secretary-General will receive and act on them .
The Education Commission will have succeeded if we are able to leverage the funding and political will to ensure that every child learns , regardless of their income , location , or social status .
Our work will not be complete until that happens .
Achieving Growth in a Rebalanced World
MILAN – Although the financial crisis is winding down , the prospects for growth in the global economy are unlikely to pick up .
This is , in part , inevitable .
But it is also the result of poor coordination between governments as the world economy rebalances .
Prior to the crisis , American consumers , on average , either saved nothing or accumulated debt .
That has now changed .
With household wealth seriously damaged by the housing crash and other asset-price declines , pensions and retirement provisions are in disarray .
Because asset prices will not reach pre-crisis levels anytime soon ( that is , without inflating another bubble and risking renewed instability ) , household saving in the United States has risen to about 5 % of disposable income , and probably will rise further .
This withdrawal of the US consumer is part ( perhaps half ) of the process of rebalancing the global economy .
Restoring America ’ s savings-investment balance implies a reduction in global aggregate demand of around $ 800 billion .
To be sure , fiscal deficits and emergency measures in advanced economies and some major developing countries have cushioned the sharp decline , substituting in part for missing consumers .
But this substitution cannot continue indefinitely .
In advanced countries , governments will eventually be forced to reduce spending , and central banks will withdraw from emergency credit provisions and guarantees .
As a result , many believe that a “ new normal ” of slower advanced-country growth is upon us .
Despite a recovery in asset prices in many countries and the deceleration of negative growth , unemployment is high and rising .
Risk spreads have declined from their mid-crisis highs , but credit in many sectors remains tight or barely available , while the financial sector is set to become more conservative – and is likely to be re-regulated with higher capital , reserve , and margin requirements .
And this is just the baseline scenario .
Downside risks include fiscal destabilization resulting from a failure to rein in deficits , inflation and withdrawal of central bank autonomy , and loss of confidence in the dollar , which continues to be the reserve currency for the global economy .
Little wonder , then , that many knowledgeable analysts reasonably expect post-crisis growth in advanced countries to be lower , perhaps by 0.5 to 1 % .
A 1 % slowdown in advanced-country growth translates into roughly $ 350 billion of missing aggregate demand every year , in addition to the shortfall because of rebalancing in the US .
If the slowdown in advanced countries persists , pre-crisis growth levels will not be achievable in the developing world either , owing to insufficient demand to absorb the implied increase in output .
Of course , individual developing countries may be spared .
But it is an unfortunate mathematical fact that not everyone can gain market share .
If the advanced-country scenario is right , many developing countries will lose out and experience sharply diminished growth .
Prior to the crisis , many suspected that the mix of aggregate demand that was supporting high growth was unsustainable , though the problem perhaps seemed too hypothetical to compel collective action .
Not anymore .
But the collective action problem is no less daunting , and it requires urgent attention if the world ’ s growth aspirations are to be achieved .
The problem is all the more pressing because countries can achieve gains in market share not only through higher private-sector competitiveness , but also by means of protectionist measures .
And , as we have seen in many countries ’ efforts to ameliorate the crisis , the non-cooperative protectionist response is much more likely to be adopted – despite wide recognition that it is highly destructive – when aggregate demand is in short supply .
So what can be done to shore up global aggregate demand and growth prospects , while preserving the economic openness that has benefited major parts of the developing world so greatly in the past 30 years ?
First , countries with current-account surpluses such as Germany , Japan and China must recognize that their own growth ( and that of others ) depends on reducing the global savings-investment imbalance , which will result in narrowing external deficits elsewhere .
This needs to be done on a sustained basis following the withdrawal of extraordinary fiscal stimulus .
Second , everyone must recognize their stake in restoring balanced advanced-country growth as much and as soon as possible in order to counter the ongoing shortfall in aggregate demand .
After all , advanced countries account for about two-thirds of global GDP , so slow growth in these countries will inevitably impede global growth and truncate the growth potential of much of the developing world .
This challenge , however , is very complex because deleveraging and rebalancing cannot be completed overnight .
But key steps can and should be taken : restoration of fiscal balance in well-communicated plans , commitment to central bank autonomy and low inflation , and striking a thoughtful balance between under- and over-regulation of the financial sector .
Externally , major trading partners and holders of advanced-country assets can support rebalancing by agreeing to avoid sudden and potentially destabilizing shifts in the composition of their balance sheets .
So , two crucial items must claim priority at the top of the world ’ s economic agenda in the months ahead .
The first is re-regulation of advanced countries financial systems with a view to ensuring greater stability without impairing essential functions or unnecessarily elevating the cost of capital .
The second is a set of understandings and commitments among the major advanced and developing countries to rebalance the global economy in order to restore aggregate demand and growth .
If that can be accomplished , the world will have taken a major step toward a relatively smooth , effective , and equitable global economic recovery .
Sustaining Progress in Transition Countries
NEW YORK – In the World Bank ’ s most recent “ Doing Business ” report , half of the Eastern European and Central Asian countries included in the global ranking were among the top 50 .
As a measure of economic maturity , the report confirms what many in the international development community have long known : the region is ascendant .
Over the last decade , the economies of Eastern Europe and Central Asia have recorded spectacular gains , buttressed by ambitious market and public-sector reforms .
The question now is how to ensure that this progress – which has tripled the size of the middle class – is sustained .
Signs of the region ’ s social and economic prosperity are everywhere .
In Azerbaijan , incomes have increased dramatically in recent decades , and only 5 % of the population now lives below the poverty line – down from nearly 50 % in 2002 .
Elsewhere , Estonia is the third country in Europe in startups per person and has one of the fastest Internet speeds anywhere .
And from Albania to Kyrgyzstan , e-government systems are allowing more people to connect with critical services through online and electronic portals .
But while it is tempting to assume that the region is destined for prosperity , structural bottlenecks continue to slow progress , especially in the Western Balkans , the southern Caucasus , and parts of Central Asia .
To maintain momentum in meeting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) by 2030 , leaders must address three key issues .
First , the region ’ s economies need to be strengthened to incentivize smarter , more sustainable growth .
For example , fossil-fuel subsidies should be reconsidered , because they discourage investment in energy-efficiency projects , and impede the development of renewable technologies .
Similarly , while public financing of pensions and welfare programs is dependent on taxing labor , much of the region currently suffers from high rates of unemployment ; in the Western Balkans , there are nearly no jobs , or none at all .
Job creation is an urgent challenge for every state in the region .
Second , in many countries , the space for civil society is becoming narrower , posing a threat to pluralism and accountability .
To prevent conflict and give voice to the region ’ s marginalized groups , tolerance and respect for human rights must be made essential ingredients of governance .
Finally , the region must coordinate on strategies to address the changes that automation and artificial intelligence will bring to the labor market .
Leaders in some countries , particularly Belarus , are shifting economic output from heavy manufacturing to technology startups .
But authorities everywhere can do more to increase the resilience of their workforces .
Fortunately , governments , technology companies , civil-society groups , and journalists recognize the salience of these issues and are working together to build more transparent and accountable institutions .
In many countries , heads of government are using the SDGs to guide their national planning and efforts to legislate reforms .
The parliaments of several Central Asian countries have even endorsed the SDGs as a development roadmap .
Changes like these are helping to translate development ambition into action .
In Armenia , the government recently created the world ’ s first national SDG innovation laboratory , a collaborative effort designed to “ accelerate ” SDG implementation .
Initial research efforts will focus on increasing the country ’ s tax collection , improving its education system , and boosting its renewable-energy sector .
Meanwhile , planning officials in Moldova have used crowdfunding to raise millions of dollars from the diaspora to fund sustainable development projects at home .
Revitalization efforts have included the reconstruction of a public plaza in the capital , Chișinău , and the expansion of infrastructure in rural areas .
The region ’ s private sector is also participating actively in sustainable development efforts .
From Siemens ’ green heating and air conditioning systems to Unilever ’ s “ equal pay for equal work ” policy , multinational firms operating in Eastern Europe and Central Asia are embracing sustainability and equality as viable business models .
In only a few decades , the people of Eastern Europe and Central Asia have witnessed profound political and economic changes .
To capitalize on the development progress already made , countries and organizations must learn from one another , adapting solutions to local conditions .
That will be the main topic at the Istanbul Development Dialogues , an annual global gathering organized by the UN Development Programme , this week .
As the new UNDP Strategic Plan for 2018-2021 argues , collaboration is a critical component to any sustainable-development strategy .
If the measure of a country can be calculated by how easily business is conducted within its borders , the states of Eastern Europe and Central Asia have a bright future .
With strong leadership that transforms the region ’ s economies and modernizes its institutions , the region ’ s recent gains will not be fleeting .
The Achilles ’ Heel of Trumponomics
NEW HAVEN – Donald Trump ’ s economic strategy is severely flawed .
The US president-elect wants to restore growth via deficit spending in a country with a chronic shortfall of saving .
This points to a further compression in national saving , making a widening of an already outsize trade gap all but inevitable .
That dynamic unmasks the Achilles ’ heel of Trumponomics : a blatant protectionist bias that collides head-on with America ’ s inescapable reliance on foreign saving and trade deficits to sustain economic growth .
The Trump administration will not inherit a strong and sound US economy .
The pace of recovery since the Great Recession has been running at half that of normal cyclical rebounds – all the more disturbing given the massive size of the contraction in 2008-09 .
And savings , the seed corn of future prosperity , remain in woefully short supply .
The so-called net national saving rate – the depreciation-adjusted sum of business , household , and government saving – stood at just 2.4 % of national income in mid-2016 .
While that ’ s an improvement from the unprecedented negative saving position in 2008-2011 , it remains far short of the 6.3 % average that prevailed over the final three decades of the twentieth century .
This is important because it explains the pernicious trade deficits that Trump continues to rail against .
Lacking in saving and wanting to grow , the United States must import surplus saving from abroad .
And the only way to attract that foreign capital is by running massive current-account and trade deficits .
The numbers bear this out : since 2000 , when national saving fell well below trend , the current-account deficit has widened to an average of 3.8 % of GDP – nearly four times the 1 % gap from 1970 to 1999 .
Similarly , the net export deficit – the broadest measure of a country ’ s trade imbalance – has been 4 % of GDP since 2000 , versus an average of 1.1 % over the final three decades of the twentieth century .
Trumponomics has the cause and effect behind this development backwards .
It fixates on country-specific sources of the trade deficit , like China and Mexico , but misses the fundamental point that these bilateral deficits are symptoms of America ’ s far deeper saving problem .
Presume for the moment that the US closes down trade with China and Mexico – the first and fourth largest components of the overall trade deficit – through a combination of tariffs and other protectionist measures ( including the proposed renegotiation of NAFTA and a Mexican-funded border wall ) .
Without addressing America ’ s chronic saving shortage , the Chinese and Mexican components of the trade deficit would simply be redistributed to other countries – most likely to higher-cost producers .
The result would be the functional equivalent of a tax hike on beleaguered middle-class US families .
In short , there is no bilateral fix for a multilateral problem .
The US had trade deficits with 101 countries in 2015 – a multilateral problem stemming from a saving shortfall that cannot be effectively addressed through country-specific “ remedies . ”
That ’ s not to say that America ’ s trading partners should be let off the hook for unfair practices .
But it does mean that there is limited hope for resolving seemingly chronic trade deficits – and the related erosion of domestic hiring traceable to these imbalances – if the US doesn ’ t start saving again .
Alas , this plot is about to thicken .
Trumponomics seems likely to exacerbate America ’ s saving shortfall in the years ahead .
Analyses by the Tax Policy Center , the Tax Foundation , and Moody ’ s Analytics all indicate that federal budget deficits under Trump ’ s economic plan are headed back toward at least 7 % of GDP over the next ten years .
Trump ’ s senior economic-policy advisers , Peter Navarro and Wilbur Ross ( Trump &apos;s pick for commerce secretary ) , argued in a position paper in September that these estimates are flawed , because they don ’ t take into account “ growth-inducing windfalls ” from regulatory and energy reforms , or the added bonanza that should arise from a sharp narrowing of America ’ s trade deficit .
Indeed , the Navarro-Ross analysis attributes fully 73 % of the growth-inducing revenue windfall of Trumponomics to a massive improvement in the overall trade balance over the next decade .
Yet , as stressed above , barring a miraculous surge in national saving , this is highly dubious .
Creative accounting , long a staple of supply-side economics , has never been more imaginative .
Therein lies one of the most glaring disconnects of Trumponomics .
Getting tough on trade at a time when national saving is about to come under ever-greater pressure simply doesn ’ t add up .
Even the most conservative estimates of the federal budget deficit suggest that the already-depressed net national saving rate could re-enter negative territory at some point in the 2018-2019 period .
That would put renewed pressure on the current-account and trade deficits , making it extremely difficult to reverse the loss of jobs and income that politicians are quick to blame on America ’ s trading partners .
Ironically , in the coming era of negative saving , the US will find itself increasingly dependent on surplus saving from abroad .
If the Trump administration takes aim at major foreign lenders – namely , China – its strategy could quickly backfire .
At a minimum , there could be an adverse impact on the terms by which America borrows from abroad ; that could mean higher interest rates – hints of which are already evident – and ultimately downward pressure on the dollar .
And , of course , there is the worst-case scenario of an escalating global trade war .
Protectionism , anemic saving , and deficit spending make for an especially toxic cocktail .
Under Trumponomics , it will be exceedingly difficult to make America great again .
A Chinese Champion of Peace and Freedom
PRAGUE – On Christmas Day last year , one of China ’ s best-known human rights activists , the writer and university professor Liu Xiaobo , was condemned to 11 years in prison .
Liu is one of the main drafters of Charter 08 , a petition inspired by Czechoslovakia ’ s Charter 77 , calling on the Chinese government to adhere to its own laws and constitution , and demanding the open election of public officials , freedom of religion and expression , and the abolition of “ subversion ” laws .
For his bravery and clarity of thought about China ’ s future , Liu deserves the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize .
There are two reasons why we believe that Liu would be a worthy recipient of that prestigious award .
First and foremost , he stands in the tradition of Nobel Peace Prize laureates who have been recognized for their contribution to the struggle for human rights .
Nobel laureates such as Martin Luther King , Lech Walesa , and Aung San Suu Kyi are but a few of the many examples that the Nobel Committee has recognized in previous years .
We are convinced that the concepts that Liu and his colleagues put down on paper in December 2008 are both universal and timeless .
These ideals – respect for human rights and human dignity , and the responsibility of citizens to ensure that their governments respect those rights – represent humanity ’ s highest aspirations .
Should the Nobel Committee choose to recognize Liu ’ s courage and sacrifice in articulating these ideals , it would not only draw global attention to the injustice of Liu ’ s 11-year sentence .
It would also help to amplify within China the universal and humanistic values for which Liu has spent so much of his life fighting .
The second reason why Liu deserves the Nobel Peace Prize resonates with Alfred Nobel ’ s original intent for the award .
In working to promote human rights , political reform , and democratization in China , Liu has made a significant contribution to the values of peace and fraternity among nations that Nobel had in mind when he created the award more than a century ago .
Of course , democratization does not automatically guarantee better behavior on the world stage .
But it does facilitate a full and rigorous public debate over key questions of a state ’ s foreign and domestic policies .
This active and searching conversation , the hallmark of a democratic polity , is the best hope for better decisions by governments , both at home and abroad .
Liu ’ s committed advocacy on behalf of democracy in China is , above all , intended for the benefit of the Chinese people .
But his courage and example may help to accelerate the dawn of the day when China ’ s participation in international affairs is aided by the expertise and oversight of civil-society groups , an independent media , and an engaged citizenry able to express its views through the ballot box .
It is primarily for these two reasons that we believe that Liu would be a worthy recipient of the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize .
In conferring on Liu one of the world ’ s highest honors , the Committee would be signaling once again the importance of human rights and democracy on the one hand , and world peace and international solidarity on the other .
Liu ’ s harsh prison sentence was meant as an exemplary measure , a stern warning to all other Chinese who might want to follow his path .
We are convinced that there are moments when exemplary civic engagement , such as Liu ’ s , requires an exemplary response .
Awarding him the Nobel Peace Prize is precisely the response that his courage deserves .
A Civilization in Crisis
A Clarion Call for Emerging Markets
ITHACA – With 2012 underway , it is worth reflecting on how a decade of strong economic growth in emerging markets led to last year ’ s resounding political transformations .
From the dramatic events in the Middle East , to the groundswell of support for the anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare in India , leaders in emerging markets are getting a clear message from the streets that growth is not everything .
They ignore this message at their peril .
Emerging-market economies delivered solid growth during the 2000 ’ s , and even survived the global financial crisis without a growth collapse .
But the specter of rising corruption is compromising the legitimacy of their economic gains and eroding support for further reforms needed to sustain their growth momentum .
Corruption takes many forms , but , in emerging markets , a combination of factors has turned it into a cancer that ultimately topples regimes .
Relentless low-level corruption is a major irritant for poor people in many of these countries ; indeed , it limits their access to the social services and basic government functions that they often depend upon for their very survival .
Another type of corruption involves siphoning enormous sums of money from large-scale projects .
In India , for example , the government lost as much as $ 30-40 billion of much-needed revenue when coveted band spectrum was sold through a rigged auction .
For ordinary people , large-scale corruption is less visible , because , while the sums involved are mind-boggling , the costs are not as directly felt as they are in the case of lower-level graft .
But the perception of this type of mega-corruption has changed as rapid growth has increased inequality .
In countries like China and India , rapid economic growth has lifted a huge number of people out of poverty .
But the fruits of globalization and rapid growth have not been evenly shared – the rich become super-rich , even as a large fraction of the population remains destitute .
Rising income inequality is hardly limited to emerging markets , but their combination of open corruption and pervasive inequities creates a toxic brew that is undermining support for reforms that would strengthen and consolidate their economic gains .
In many emerging markets , a lack of political freedom adds to the combustible mix .
The combination of corruption , inequality , and political repression builds up enormous pressure , and there are no institutional channels through which to release it .
But freer political regimes are not a panacea .
In a democracy like India ’ s , the politically well-connected benefit from skewed growth , thus increasing the resentment of those left behind .
The opportunity to “ throw the rascals out ” in each election cycle helps to let off some steam , but it does not resolve the problems that are generating it .
It is difficult to predict what triggers popular protest , but economic factors are key .
For example , rising food prices tend to hurt the poor , especially the urban poor , who spend a large share of their income on food ; unlike agricultural workers , they receive none of the benefits of higher food prices .
With swelling urban populations , it will become increasingly difficult to keep a lid on these pressures .
Some governments have reacted to recent events with political repression , information blackouts , or a combination of authoritarian measures .
China , for example , blocked media coverage of the Egyptian protests .
The Arab Spring , however , reveals the fragility of repressive political regimes that try to maintain their legitimacy by limiting information flows .
The main lesson for dynamic emerging-market countries is that an exclusive focus on GDP growth may ultimately not be good for economic and political stability .
Even with rapid increases in national income , if these countries ’ leaders do not distribute the benefits fairly , they will become vulnerable to popular discontent .
Tackling corruption is critical to improving long-term growth and maintaining social stability .
These economies need measures that help to keep the poor out of poverty traps , and that give them realistic opportunities to improve their economic well-being .
Such steps include broadening financial markets to give more people access to credit and investment , strengthening social safety nets to protect the economically vulnerable , and improving educational access and quality .
These lessons apply equally to advanced economies , which also suffer from rising inequality and subtle forms of corruption .
But , for those wealthy economies , restoring decent growth is now the major priority .
Emerging markets have a golden opportunity to build on their economic gains and lock in growth and stability by tackling deep-seated problems like corruption .
As the past year ’ s events have shown , the costs of inaction could be calamitous .
A Climate Deal is Not Enough
AMSTERDAM – During the COP15 climate summit in Copenhagen , world leaders have been negotiating the future of our planet .
All the signs suggest that they are unlikely to sign a global climate treaty .
The views of the various countries , and of the various industrial and political power blocs , differ too much .
The politicians , civil servants , and other participants at the Copenhagen summit have mainly been bombarding each other with numbers .
Figures on how much various countries should reduce CO2 emissions , the amount of money they should put up in coming years , the exact nature of their responsibilities , how much temperature increase Earth will be able to endure , and how long we can continue to wait .
These are all very important issues .
But the mere figures are simply not enough .
A different approach to the problem of climate change is needed .
The climate issue can only be solved on the basis of shared , deeply felt ethical principles .
Humanity has reached a critical moment in Earth ’ s history , at which peoples and nations will have to recognize their solidarity – with each other and with the Earth – and start acting upon it .
Similar to the way world leaders adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration in September 2000 , and embraced the resulting Millennium Development Goals , today ’ s climate negotiators will have to commit themselves to creating a basis of shared fundamental ethical principles .
Such a basis is not hard to find .
Its inspiration can be the Earth Charter , which , launched in 2000 , was initiated by , among others , former USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Wangari Mathaai , who received the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts in the Green Belt Movement , a pan-African tree-planting initiative .
The climate problem does not stop at borders .
In the next few decades , a low-lying country like the Netherlands will need to invest billions of euros to intensify its age-old struggle against rising water .
But in many other countries , the water is already flooding over the dikes , both literally and figuratively .
Climate change affects particularly those countries that lack the money needed to take adequate measures against rising sea levels , persistent droughts , or devastating storms , even though they had nothing to do with the primary cause of these problems – industrialization in the developed countries .
Apart from the necessary , often infrastructural adaptations to survive the effects of climate change , enormous efforts to prevent even worse things from happening are required .
Large investments in forestation , agriculture , and energy supply are called for .
In devising solutions , the role of women should be the main focus .
Women are often the first people who have to address the problem of gaining access to natural resources , and they are capable of playing a major role as pioneers in finding solutions to climate change and the way humankind should adapt to it .
In the short term , the world should become a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters .
This is a mission for all humankind , in which patriotic feelings and thinking in terms of power blocs have no place .
The pursuit of a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters requires a tremendous effort .
Precisely for this reason , it also requires a broadly shared ethical basis .
This would guide the negotiating parties in such a way that they look not only for solutions to a part of the problem , but first and foremost at a comprehensive solution to the entire problem .
The climate change issue is too important to be left in the care of politicians .
In Copenhagen , it is therefore imperative that not only nation states , but the business community and citizens combine their efforts to save our planet ’ s climate .
That is not only a scientific necessity ; it is an ethical imperative .
A Clockwork Chemistry
OXFORD – In Anthony Burgess ’ s novella ( and Stanley Kubrick ’ s film ) A Clockwork Orange , Alex , an unrepentant psychopath , has his eyes pried wide open and is forced to watch violent images .
Like Pavlov ’ s dog , Alex is being programmed to respond with nausea to violence and sex .
This scene remains shocking , but , like most science fiction , it has aged .
The behaviorist psychology it drew upon has long expired , and the fear that science will be used to make , or even force , people to be morally better now sounds old-fashioned .
Science fiction ages fast , but it has a long afterlife .
Over the past decade , an army of psychologists , neuroscientists , and evolutionary biologists has been busy trying to uncover the neural “ clockwork ” that underlies human morality .
They have started to trace the evolutionary origins of pro-social sentiments such as empathy , and have begun to uncover the genes that dispose some individuals to senseless violence and others to acts of altruism , and the pathways in our brain that shape our ethical decisions .
And to understand how something works is also to begin to see ways to modify and even control it .
Indeed , scientists have not only identified some of the brain pathways that shape our ethical decisions , but also chemical substances that modulate this neural activity .
A recent study has shown that the anti-depressant Citalopram can change the responses of individuals to hypothetical moral dilemma scenarios .
Individuals given the drug were less willing to sacrifice an individual to save the lives of several others .
Another series of studies has shown that when the hormone oxytocin is administered via nasal spray , it increases trusting and cooperative behavior within social groups , but also decreases cooperation with those perceived as outsiders .
Neuroscientists have even magnetically “ zapped ” carefully targeted areas of people ’ s brains to influence their moral judgments in surprising ways – for example , making it easier for them to lie .
Of course , no one is developing a “ moral pill ” that will transform us into saints .
But the research is advancing fast , and it is almost certain to suggest new ways to reshape our moral intuitions , sentiments , and motivations .
Should we use our growing scientific understanding of the basis of human morality to try to make people morally better ?
A Clockwork Orange was accused of glorifying violence , and some of its scenes are still hard to watch .
But as Burgess himself argued , the novella has an almost Christian message : what makes us human is our freedom to choose both good and evil , and for society to crush individuals into servile conformity is as wicked as , and perhaps even worse than , the sadism of psychopaths like Alex .
I suspect that many will agree with this view .
They will agree that our ability to distinguish right from wrong is something precious that we should safeguard , not a broken clock that scientists should fix .
Of course , most of us don ’ t need to be conditioned to feel repulsed by rape or torture .
But this does not mean that we are morally good , or good enough .
As you read this , perfectly ordinary people somewhere in the world are doing unspeakable things to others .
Even in the most advanced and affluent societies , a vast concentrated effort is needed to preserve even minimal decency : think of locks , security alarms , police , courts , and prisons .
And it is doubtful that we really care enough about others , or give enough to the less fortunate .
Humans are born with the capacity to be moral , but it is a limited capacity which is ill equipped to deal with the ethical complexities of the modern world .
For thousands of years , humans have relied on education , persuasion , social institutions , and the threat of real ( or supernatural ) punishment to make people behave decently .
We could all be morally better , but it is clear that this traditional approach cannot take us much further .
It is not as if people would suddenly begin to behave better if we just gave them more facts and statistics , or better arguments .
So we shouldn ’ t be too quick to dismiss the suggestion that science might help – in the first instance , by helping us design more effective institutions , more inspiring moral education , or more persuasive ethical arguments .
But science might also offer more direct ways of influencing our brains .
Science fiction sometimes limits rather than expands our sense of what is possible .
It would be self-defeating , or worse , to try to promote morality through brutal coercion .
Governments must not be given the power to control its citizens ’ moral code – we know that if they had such power , they would misuse it .
It would be ideal if individuals could freely explore different ways to improve themselves , whether by practicing mindfulness , reading moral philosophy , or , yes , by taking a ’ morality ’ pill .
But it is also true that although some people are eager to take pills that make them feel better or think faster , it is not so obvious that people would really want to take pills that would make them morally better .
It is not clear that people really want to be morally better .
And those who , like the psychopathic Alex , need the most help are probably those who would want it least .
These are , of course , hypothetical questions .
We don ’ t yet know what is possible .
But it is better to begin the ethical discussion too early than too late .
And even if “ moral pills ” are just science fiction , they raise deep questions .
Will we want to take them if they ever become available ?
And what does it say about us if we won ’ t ?
A Cloud over Airplane Safety
PRINCETON – When airports across Europe reopened after the closure caused by the eruption of Iceland ’ s Eyjafjallajökull volcano , it was not because the amount of ash in the atmosphere had dropped , but because the risk that the ash posed to airplane safety had been reassessed .
Was it new scientific information that led to the lifting of the flight ban , or was it a reflection of the hardship , both personal and economic , that the ban was causing ?
Over six days , about 95,000 flights were canceled , at a cost to airlines of more than $ 1 billion .
An estimated five million people were stranded or delayed .
The British economy lost £ 1.5 billion , and others were similarly affected .
Flower growers in Kenya , who depend on air transport to take their short-lived product to Europe , suddenly had no income .
Sixteen cancer patients in critical need of bone marrow for transplants were put at risk because the matching marrow could not be flown in from the United States or Canada .
In the past , jets flying into ash from volcanoes in the US , Indonesia , the Philippines , and Mexico have temporarily lost engine power , and in one case , dropped thousands of feet , although all managed to land safely .
But there was no evidence that the more widely dispersed ash blowing over Europe from Iceland would cause similar problems .
The decision to ground flights was based on the view that any level of ash in the atmosphere posed some risk to aircraft , and that no matter how slight that risk might be , the government ’ s job was , as British Prime Minister Gordon Brown put it , “ to make sure that safety was paramount . ”
Indeed , in closing their skies , European governments seem to have given safety absolute priority over everything else .
Yet none of them act on that principle in other areas .
Some 3,000 people die on the world ’ s roads every day .
Cutting speed limits to , say , 10 kilometers per hour would prevent most accidents and save many lives .
We don ’ t do it , because we give safety a lower priority than our desire to spend less time driving .
The price we are willing to pay for safety cannot be infinite .
It is distasteful to put a price on human life , but the more we spend on safety , the less we will have for our other goals .
The British government uses a figure of a little more than £ 1 million as a general limit to the amount it is prepared to pay to save a statistical life – for example , by improving road safety .
In the US , the Department of Transportation is prepared to go up to $ 5.8 million – nearly four times as much , at current exchange rates – for the same purpose .
Does that mean that safety is paramount in the US , but not in Britain ?
Giovanni Bisignani , the head of the International Air Transport Association , an industry group , criticized the shutdown , saying that no risk assessment had been undertaken .
On the whole , though , the public seemed to support the decision .
Stranded travelers , interviewed at airports , typically said that they would rather be stuck at an airport than in a plane falling out of the sky .
But what if some travelers have a higher tolerance of risk , or just a more urgent need to travel , than others ?
John Stuart Mill , in his classic book On Liberty , considered a situation in which a man sets out to cross a bridge that we know is unsafe .
In Mill ’ s view , we are justified in stopping him only to make sure that he is aware of the danger .
Once he knows of it , the decision is his to make , because only he can judge the importance of his journey , and balance that against the risk he is running .
Air safety is slightly different , because a crashing plane can kill people on the ground , but the greatest risks by far are borne by the passengers and crew .
If they are fully informed of the risks , and are still willing to fly – perhaps the crew has been offered more money , as workers in dangerous occupations often are – should we prevent them from making the decision to fly ?
In the end , after test flights with no passengers aboard had shown no engine damage , and aircraft engine manufacturers told aviation authorities that their engines could operate safely with a low level of ash in the atmosphere , Europe ’ s skies were reopened .
The International Civil Aviation Authority has announced that it will convene a group of experts to help it provide guidance for the industry to decide what level of ash in the atmosphere makes it unsafe to fly .
Now that we have seen the costs of giving absolute priority to safety , we know that this is not only a technical question .
I trust that among the experts will be some who have pondered the underlying ethical question : how safe should we aim to be ?
A Communist Party without Communism
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s anointment of Alexander Medvedev to succeed him in what is supposed to be a democratic presidential election next March shows that Russia ’ s leaders have not changed a whit .
It looks increasingly likely that , as under Leonid Brezhnev , we will see the same names in the news for decades to come .
According to Gleb Pavlovsky , the Putin regime ’ s leading ideologist , the current Russian system is perfect in all respects but one : it doesn ’ t know its enemies .
Indeed , it seems as if everyone in the Kremlin is reading Carl Schmitt , the Nazi legal theorist who taught that naming your enemy is the central mission of politics .
In the spirit of Schmitt , Putin ’ s men designated a liberal party , the Union of Right Forces , as their ur-enemy .
Its public meetings were broken up by armed police ; its leaders arrested and beaten ; Putin called its supporters “ coyotes . ”
What is surprising is that this aggressive behavior occurred in response to no visible danger .
Oil prices are soaring , as are Putin ’ s approval ratings .
His appointees control everything that matters , from Gazprom to the Central Electoral Committee .
Since the pacification of Chechnya with violence and subsidies , the incarceration or emigration of a few financially viable opponents , and the massive “ social investments ” of recent years , which , under Medvedev ’ s personal supervision , have bribed the population , no credible force can seriously challenge Putin ’ s men .
Yet their regime is in crisis , and they know it .
Russia ’ s economy is more dependent on gas and oil than ever before .
Military reform has been reversed .
Despite increasing incomes , Russians are less educated and less healthy than they were when Putin came to power ; they still die at a shockingly young age .
Russian involvement in world affairs is tainted by poison and corruption .
State monopolies undo what private businesses created .
With more money , ill-educated bureaucrats hire more ill-educated bureaucrats ; as a result , the regime fails to rule the country .
The country is unruly , and its rulers know it .
So they panic .
Putin ’ s aim was to subject all power to the control of Russia ’ s security forces .
His generation of KGB officers watched the collapse of the Communist Party and all the governmental bodies that it “ directed and controlled , ” including the KGB .
Under Putin , the security service has had its revenge .
Its people have become powerful , arrogant , and enormously rich .
They have also become disobedient .
In 2004 , General Viktor Cherkesov , then Putin ’ s representative in northwest Russia , published an essay that glorified the KGB as the only unspoiled authority in a corrupted country .
This essay , more than anything else , defined Putin ’ s second term .
In October 2007 , Cherkesov ( now chief of one of the most obscure and powerful services , the Federal Anti-Drug Administration ) published another essay in which he lamented his colleagues ’ degradation : warriors had turned into traders , he complained .
Earlier , generals from a competing service , the FSB , had arrested Cherkesov ’ s deputy for “ illegal bugging . ”
In a public gesture of despair , Cherkesov admitted the failure of Putin ’ s project to reanimate Russian governance by subordinating it to the security services .
Cherkesov ’ s deputy remains in prison .
Most believe that Putin is unable to intervene in his defense .
In the absence of Communist Party control , these security officers betrayed their corporate ethic and engaged in horse-trading , applying force when a trade did not go well .
That this happens to ordinary Russians is clear ; what Cherkesov revealed was that Putin ’ s circle also confronts this situation .
What is to be done when ex-KGB warriors turn their swords and bugs against one another ?
Cherkesov ’ s case exemplifies Putin ’ s nightmare .
But if your instincts betray you , you go back to even deeper ones .
Now that Putin ’ s people have left their predecessors ’ neo-liberal ideas behind and feel disenchanted with the ex-KGB clique , the task is to recreate an omnipresent political party that controls the security services , the administration , business , and much else .
This party will be centralized under personal leadership and will reduce the state to a legal fiction .
Preaching nationalism , its managers will believe in their universal competence , as opposed to KGB-style professionalism and corporatism .
Boris Yeltsin forbade party cells in state-controlled institutions by decree .
Putin ’ s lawyers will reverse that decision ; the party will have cells or committees in every factory , corporation , military unit , university department , etc .
Integrated by the leader ’ s charisma and party discipline , party members will direct and unify the desolated country .
This is Putin ’ s plan .
Like former Soviet leader Yuri Andropov , the only other KGB man to rule Russia , Putin will become the party ’ s general secretary .
As in the Soviet era , state and governmental officials will be reduced to party ciphers – the role that President Medvedev will play under General Secretary Putin .
And , of course , being General Secretary carries no constitutional term limit .
In the end , Putin has what history left him : not ideas , just a faction yearning to consolidate its grip on power .
Lenin and Trotsky needed a party to make their ideology a reality ; Putin and Medvedev are devising an ideology to solidify their party .
It is a bizarre ideology .
Accusing warriors of being traders and traders of being thieves , it shuns its Marxist origins .
It will subordinate all who really do work – traders , warriors , journalists , and others – to party ideologues whose sole job is to search for enemies .
A Confederal Solution for Palestine
LONDON – Last month , while in New York City , I happened to be staying in the same hotel as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu .
To accommodate his security needs , the hotel had been converted into a fortress , much like Israel itself .
Netanyahu was in the United States for yet another round of Middle East peace talks .
The US offered various sweeteners to induce Israel to freeze its West Bank settlement construction for another 90 days .
The Israelis refused ; another impasse was reached .
What , then , might be the prospects of a negotiated peace between two peoples with claims to the same land ?
The answer is : very poor .
All peace efforts since the Oslo accords of 1993 have been based on the “ two-state solution , ” according to which Israel is supposed to turn over the occupied territories to a Palestinian state , the Palestinians are supposed to renounce any claims on the Jewish state , and everyone is supposed to live happily ever after .
A negotiated “ land for peace ” solution still remains official Western doctrine .
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech , “ a just , lasting , and comprehensive peace ” has to be based on “ two states for two peoples . ”
Meanwhile , the two main parties to the dispute , Palestine and Israel , are searching for unilateral alternatives to the stymied “ peace process . ”
The Palestinians are pushing for international recognition of their statehood , while the Israelis are using their settlement policy to preempt a Palestinian state .
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has said that , if the latest peace talks collapse , he will press for UN recognition of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders .
This month , Brazil and Argentina recognized “ Palestine , ” and a cascade of Latin American countries is expected to follow .
Abbas is now setting his sights on Europe , and would ask Turkey to serve as a go-between .
The game is to use international recognition of an independent Palestinian state to pressure the US to retreat from its almost unconditional support for Israeli policy .
Israel ’ s main concern continues to be security .
The official Western doctrine is that Israel ’ s long-term security depends on the success of the “ peace process . ”
In practice , Israel has been taking other measures to secure its future .
Media attention has been focused on the “ security wall , ” which has certainly succeeded in reducing the level of violence .
But , to the hawks who now control Israeli politics , the key to Israel ’ s security depends on depth of defense , for which expansion of the settlements is indispensable .
The hawks ’ recipe for survival is threefold : continued military and economic support from the US , defensible frontiers through a strategic settlement program , and the carve-up of the Palestinian West Bank into disconnected bantustans , or subordinate authorities , incapable of concerted opposition to Israeli policy .
Thus , while Abbas seeks to create a new “ fact on the ground ” by drumming up international support for a Palestinian state , Israel aims to trump him by making such a state unviable .
The ideal alternative to both strategies is a peace process that aims not to create two states , but rather to establish the political and economic basis for a single confederal state .
Indeed , the two-state solution was always an illusion .
There was never enough land to satisfy the passionate possessiveness of all those with claims to it .
And , over time , Israeli settler disengagement from the West Bank and East Jerusalem has become just as impossible as any attempt by Israel to expel its remaining Arabs .
Israeli Jews are bound to stay in the West Bank and East Jerusalem , and Israeli Arabs are bound to stay in Israel proper .
These are the “ facts on the ground ” that doom Palestinian hopes for a sovereign Palestinian state no less than Israeli hopes for a wholly Jewish state .
Moreover , land for peace never made sense from an economic point of view .
If compensation for wrongs to the Palestinians was to be the guiding principle , there were always better ways of going about it than to found a rickety , poverty-ridden new country dependent on foreign aid .
Most people have forgotten that the Paris Protocols of April 1994 established a customs union between Israel and the occupied territories , with a joint Economic Council to adjudicate trade disputes .
The free movement of goods , labor , and capital between the two parts could have given a tremendous economic boost to Palestinian GDP .
It could also have been the basis of a confederal state , whose Palestinian part would have benefited from the West Bank settlers ’ productivity and taxes .
But this benign prospect was undermined by the violence needed to maintain the Jewish state and enable the emergence of a Palestinian one .
The official view remains that only an internationally guaranteed two-state settlement will bring about the security needed for the economic revival of the Palestinian territories .
But it is just possible that unilateral Israeli policy , implicitly backed by the US , will create interim conditions of peace that are sufficient for economic growth to cool Palestinian nationalism .
The Palestinian cause is not the overriding preoccupation of even the Arab states , so Netanyahu ’ s strategy of defense in depth stands a better chance of success than Abbas ’ s pursuit of statehood through international recognition .
Netanyahu ’ s project is not moral .
But that doesn ’ t mean that it won ’ t work , at least for a time .
A Confederation for Kosovo
Time is running out in Kosovo .
If a United Nations-backed settlement is not reached by early December , the province ’ s majority Albanian population is likely to declare independence unilaterally – a move that the United States has announced it may support .
That would be a disastrous step .
Russia would be furious , because it fears that Kosovo ’ s secession – whether or not it is internationally recognized – might fuel separatist movements in the former Soviet empire .
Serbia is even more strongly opposed .
Dusan Prorokovic , Serbia ’ s state secretary for Kosovo , has said that his country might use force to maintain its sovereignty .
Even if the government hesitates , ultranationalist groups might push Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to send in troops : the current UN presence in Kosovo is very thin ( only 40 “ military observers ” and 2,116 policemen ) but the stationing of 15,000 NATO troops could make any armed clash very dangerous .
After eight years of international administration , Kosovo ’ s Albanian majority has tasted freedom and is eager for full independence .
But Serbia claims that the province remains an essential part of its historical and cultural tradition .
Moreover , independence would not be accepted by the Serbian public , which has already watched in dismay as “ Great Serbia ” has been gradually whittled away , most recently with the secession of Montenegro .
Serbia is prepared to concede only “ enhanced autonomy ” to Kosovo , and some capacity to enter into international agreements .
Yet , while the two parties now seem irreconcilable , it is not too late for compromise .
But this is possible only by resuscitating – and updating – an old institution of the international community : a confederation of states .
By means of a binding UN Security Council resolution , Kosovo could be granted full and exclusive authority over its citizens and territory , as well as limited capacity for action on the international scene .
It could be authorized to enter into trade agreements as well as agreements concerning individuals ( for example , admission and circulation of foreigners , or extradition ) , plus the right to seek admission to the UN ( which does not require full sovereignty and independence ) .
Kosovo would thus gain some essential trappings of statehood .
However , a decision-making body consisting of delegates from Kosovo , Serbia , and the European Union would be given full authority over major foreign policy issues ( for example , alliances and relations with international economic institutions ) , defence , borders ( in case Kosovo wished to join with Albania ) , and the treatment of Kosovo ’ s Serbian minority .
As a result , Kosovo and Serbia would constitute two distinct international subjects , bound by a confederation hinging on a common decision-making body .
Of course , this confederation would be asymmetrical , because the Serbian government ’ s sovereignty over the rest of Serbia would remain intact and unlimited , whereas the Kosovar government ’ s “ sovereignty ” over Kosovo would be restrained .
To avoid one of the two parties getting the upper hand and imposing arbitrary decisions , the common decision-making body should consist of four Serbian delegates , two Kosovar delegates , and three representatives of the EU , thus requiring both sides to gain the support of the European delegates .
In addition , the EU should create a small but effective military force ( say , 5,000 troops ) to back up the common body ’ s decisions .
As with any compromise , the contending parties would both gain and lose from this arrangement .
Serbia would save face , and would continue to have a say on crucial matters concerning Kosovo , including the treatment of the Serbian minority .
Kosovo would acquire limited independence , with its status rising from a province of a sovereign state to an international subject capable of entering into certain agreements with other states and even joining the UN .
The EU would benefit as well , by contributing to the stabilization of a highly volatile area .
Subsequently , the EU would monitor Kosovo and prevent any dispute that might turn violent .
A final advantage of this solution is that it would be temporary .
Historically , confederations sooner or later either become federations ( as occurred in the US , Germany , and Switzerland ) or , pushed by centrifugal forces , split up ( as with the United Arab Republic , established in 1958 , which split three years later into Egypt and Syria ) .
The confederation I advocate would thus constitute an intermediate stage ( lasting five or ten years ) , at the end of which Kosovo is likely to become fully independent .
Delaying a final solution in this way would provide time to verify Kosovo ’ s prospects of joining the EU and thus eventually sharing “ sovereign authority ” with other independent states , which could deflate Kosovars ’ dangerously robust nationalistic demands .
A Conservative Europe
Last week Tony Blair , Jacques Chirac , and Gerhard Schroeder met in Berlin .
They departed pledging to revive Europe &apos;s growth .
We &apos;ve heard that empty promise before .
Instead , the European Union needs a new direction .
I say this as leader of the party which has been at the forefront of Britain &apos;s engagement with Europe .
It was a Conservative government that first applied for membership in the early 1960 &apos;s .
A Conservative government took the United Kingdom into the European Economic Community in 1973 .
Margaret Thatcher worked with Jacques Delors to forge the Single Market in 1986 .
So I have no doubt that Britain must remain influential within the Union .
But British policy towards the EU has often led to worse rather than better relations among member states .
Faced with a new EU initiative , our traditional response has often been to oppose it , vote against it , lose the vote , then sulkily to adopt it while blaming everyone else .
Many Europeans are sick of British vetoes .
So am I .
Of course there are basic requirements that all member states must accept .
Foremost are the four freedoms of the single market ; free movement of goods , services , people and capital .
But a single market does not require a single social or industrial policy , far less a common taxation policy .
Allowing countries to pursue their own policies in these areas encourages competitiveness .
Forcing common standards means that Europe will fall further behind as member states shuffle their costs onto their neighbours .
Which areas should be applied to every member state , and which should be optional ?
I believe that every member state should administer those policies that do not directly and significantly affect other member states .
In areas which serve their national interest , individual members should decide whether to retain wholly national control or whether to co ‑ operate with others .
The Union &apos;s members should form a series of overlapping circles : different combinations of members should be able to pool their responsibilities in different areas of their own choosing .
Precedents exist for this .
NATO has been flexible since its inception .
France signed up for membership but later refused to submit her armed forces to NATO &apos;s central command .
Similar flexibility exists with the Euro , the Schengen Agreement , and the Social Chapter .
These precedents can be extended .
So far , everyone has had to move forward together , with individual countries negotiating specific opt ‑ outs .
But since 1998 , there has been a procedure within the Treaties - called enhanced co ‑ operation - that could allow some members to go ahead with further integration in a specific area without involving every other member .
Instead of individual member states having fraught negotiations to opt ‑ out of a new initiative , those that support it can simply opt ‑ in .
Countries that want to integrate further can do so .
They don &apos;t need to drag Britain and others kicking and screaming in their wake because the others are not compelled to join them .
In this way we can break free of the institutionalised tug of war that has characterised EU relations .
I am not talking about a two ‑ speed Europe .
That implies that we all agree on the destination and differ only about the speed of the journey .
I don &apos;t want to reach the destination that some of our partners may aspire to .
But I don &apos;t want to block their way .
There are some who say that this would mean a loss of influence on the part of those countries which choose not to integrate more closely .
But influence is not an end in itself - it is a means to an end .
Britain does not need a seat at the table when decisions on the Euro are taken .
Our economy has not been adversely affected by staying out .
Keeping the pound does not mean that we oppose the Euro , or hope for its failure .
The European Union should stop trying to do everything and concentrate on doing fewer things more effectively .
It should give member states the chance to develop an approach to Europe that suits their national traditions , within the EU framework .
It is on this basis that British Conservatives oppose the proposed constitution .
We disagree with many of its contents , of course , but also oppose the idea of having an EU constitution at all .
There is a world of difference between an association of nation states bound together by treaty , and a single entity , whether you call it a state or not , with its own legal personality , deriving its authority from its own constitution .
If this constitution were accepted in anything like the proposed form , the EU would gain many attributes and trappings of statehood : its own president and foreign minister , its own legal system .
The supremacy of EU law would derive not from Acts of national Parliaments but from a supra ‑ national constitution .
That is a radical change , not the mere tidying ‑ up exercise some suggest .
I do not believe it is right to make a change of such magnitude without specifically consulting the people on whose behalf we govern .
Elected parliaments do not own our liberties .
They safeguard them , and should not diminish those liberties without an explicit mandate .
Any proposal for a new constitution must be put to the British people and to the people in each EU member state .
A Conspiracy So Immense
NEW YORK – Is this the Age of the Conspiracy Theory ?
Plenty of evidence suggests that we are in something of a golden age for citizen speculation , documentation , and inference that takes shape – usually on the Internet – and spreads virally around the globe .
In the process , conspiracy theories are pulled from the margins of public discourse , where they were generally consigned in the past , and sometimes into the very heart of politics .
I learned this by accident .
Having written a book about the hijacking of executive power in the United States in the Bush years , I found myself , in researching new developments , stumbling upon conversations online that embrace narratives of behind-the-scenes manipulation .
There are some major themes .
A frequent one in the US is that global elites are plotting – via the Bilderberg Group and the Council on Foreign Relations , among others – to establish a “ One World Government ” dominated by themselves rather than national governments .
Sometimes , more folkloric details come into play , broadening the members of this cabal to include the Illuminati , the Freemasons , Rhodes Scholars , or , as always , the Jews .
The hallmarks of this narrative are familiar to anyone who has studied the transmission of certain story categories in times of crisis .
In literary terms , this conspiracy theory closely resembles The Protocols of the Elders of Zion , featuring secretive global elite with great power and wicked aims .
Historically , there tends to be the same set of themes : fearsome , uncontrolled transformative change led by educated , urbanized cosmopolitans .
Students of Weimar Germany know that sudden dislocations and shocks – rapid urbanization , disruption of traditional family and social ties , loosening of sexual restrictions , and economic collapse – primed many Germans to become receptive to simplistic theories that seemed to address their confusion and offer a larger meaning to their suffering .
Similarly , the “ 9 / 11 Truth Movement ” asserts that al-Qaeda ’ s attack on the Twin Towers was an “ inside job . ”
In the Muslim world , there is a widespread conspiracy theory that the Israelis were behind those attacks , and that all Jews who worked in the buildings stayed home that day .
Usually , conspiracy theories surface where people are poorly educated and a rigorous independent press is lacking .
So why are such theories gaining adherents in the US and other affluent democracies nowadays ?
Today ’ s explosion of conspiracy theories has been stoked by the same conditions that drove their acceptance in the past : rapid social change and profound economic uncertainty .
A clearly designated “ enemy ” with an unmistakable “ plan ” is psychologically more comforting than the chaotic evolution of social norms and the workings – or failures – of unfettered capitalism .
And , while conspiracy theories are often patently irrational , the questions they address are often healthy , even if the answers are frequently unsourced or just plain wrong .
In seeking answers , these citizens are reacting rationally to irrational realities .
Many citizens believe , rightly , that their mass media are failing to investigate and document abuses .
Newspapers in most advanced countries are struggling or folding , and investigative reporting is often the first thing they cut .
Concentration of media ownership and control further fuels popular mistrust , setting the stage for citizen investigation to enter the vacuum .
Likewise , in an age when corporate lobbyists have a free hand in shaping – if not drafting – public policies , many people believe , again rightly , that their elected officials no longer represent them .
Hence their impulse to believe in unseen forces .
Finally , even rational people have become more receptive to certain conspiracy theories because , in the last eight years , we actually have seen some sophisticated conspiracies .
The Bush administration conspired to lead Americans and others into an illegal war , using fabricated evidence to do so .
Is it any wonder , then , that so many rational people are trying to make sense of a political reality that really has become unusually opaque ?
When even the 9 / 11 commissioners renounce their own conclusions ( because they were based on evidence derived from torture ) , is it surprising that many want a second investigation ?
Frequently enough , it is citizens digging at the margins of the discourse – pursuing such theories – who report on news that the mainstream media ignores .
For example , it took a “ conspiracy theorist , ” Alex Jones , to turn up documentation of microwave technologies to be used by police forces on US citizens .
The New Yorker confirmed the story much later – without crediting the original source .
The mainstream media ’ s tendency to avoid checking out or reporting what is actually newsworthy in Internet conspiracy theories partly reflects class bias .
Conspiracy theories are seen as vulgar and lowbrow .
So even good , critical questions or well-sourced data unearthed by citizen investigators tend to be regarded as radioactive to highly educated formal journalists .
The real problem with this frantic conspiracy theorizing is that it leaves citizens emotionally agitated but without a solid ground of evidence upon which to base their worldview , and without constructive directions in which to turn their emotions .
This is why so many threads of discussion turn from potentially interesting citizen speculation to hate speech and paranoia .
In a fevered environment , without good editorial validation or tools for sourcing , citizens can be preyed upon and whipped up by demagogues , as we saw in recent weeks at Sarah Palin ’ s rallies after Internet theories painted Barack Obama as a terrorist or in league with terrorists .
We need to change the flow of information in the Internet age .
Citizens should be able more easily to leak information , pitch stories , and send leads to mainstream investigative reporters .
They should organize new online entities in which they pay a fee for direct investigative reporting , unmediated by corporate pressures .
And citizen investigators should be trained in basic journalism : finding good data , confirming stories with two independent sources , using quotes responsibly , and eschewing anonymity – that is , standing by their own bylines , as conventional reporters do .
This is how citizens can be taken – and take themselves – seriously as documenters and investigators of our common situation .
In a time of official lies , healthy investigative energy should shed light , not just generate heat .
A Constitutional Coup in Ukraine
Changing constitutions is always a risky business .
But it is a downright dangerous one when undertaken to benefit one man alone .
Indeed , when a president volunteers to reduce the powers of his own office , you can be certain that he is up to no good .
That is exactly what is going on in Ukraine , where President Leonid Kuchma proposes to junk our presidential system and replace it with a strange type of parliamentary system he has concocted .
Kuchma has not suddenly converted to the view that parliamentary democracies are better than presidential ones .
No , Kuchma wants to change Ukraine &apos;s constitution for no other reason than to maintain his grip on power .
Today , Kuchma rules as an all-powerful president .
But his term ends next year and he cannot run again .
So , instead of retiring gracefully , as presidents from Bill Clinton to Boris Yeltsin routinely do , Kuchma wants to change the constitution in order to become an all-powerful prime minister who will never face a limit on the length of his term .
Of course , constitutions are not meant to protect the status quo if the status quo is rotten .
Constitutions can , and should , accommodate reform when necessary .
A powerful president , however , is not necessarily wrong for Ukraine .
In our wrenching postcommunist transition , it is essential that a government can act decisively .
To change a system that seems best suited to Ukraine &apos;s circumstances , you need a good reason .
The Ukraine president is authorized to appoint and sack the prime minister , dissolve parliament if he wishes , and rule by decree if he judges that the country &apos;s institutions are in danger .
He maintains day-to-day control over every aspect of government .
So puissant a Caesar must be above reproach .
Kuchma is not .
On the contrary , what is rotten in Ukraine is not its constitution , but its president , who is mired in charges of corruption and orchestrating the murder of journalists , and who is shunned by other world leaders .
As president , Kuchma is grotesquely unpopular .
Even Slobodan Milosevic had more support in Yugoslavia before his fall .
So Kuchma knows that he cannot rely on handpicking his successor , as Yeltsin did in Russia .
Unable to assure himself of a tame presidential successor , Kuchma wants what he calls a &quot; parliamentary republic &quot; with a weak president and powerful prime minister .
But the parliament he has in mind is a mutant , one where the authoritarian rule of the criminal clans Kuchma controls will continue , unabated , behind the facade of parliamentary procedure .
People too easily forget Ukraine , this big country on the border of the soon-to-be enlarged European Union .
But any attempt to prolong Kuchma &apos;s rule will create such a political mess that it is not absurd to fear that Ukraine could follow Belarus and the Balkans of the early 1990 &apos;s into outright dictatorship and chaos .
Indeed , this scenario could worsen , because Russia is unlikely to sit around idly and watch Ukraine unravel .
Intervention of some type seems more likely in such circumstances .
Only an imperial Russia , however , would dare reabsorb Ukraine .
But an imperial Russia cannot be a democratic Russia .
So Kuchma endangers freedom and human rights not only in Ukraine , but ultimately threatens Russia &apos;s democracy as well .
Luckily , there has never been a better time for the West--particularly the EU--to nudge Ukraine back from the brink .
With EU expansion coming next spring , all Ukrainians fear that a new wall will cut their country off from the Union &apos;s easternmost border in Poland .
Although the job of maintaining Ukraine &apos;s democracy is primarily one for Ukrainians , the EU can help if it takes practical steps to reassure Ukrainians that they won &apos;t be cut off from the rest of Europe .
A generous visa regime and the use of regional development funds in Ukraine that will benefit impoverished eastern Poland , are two possible inducements .
But these should be made conditional on Kuchma leaving the country &apos;s constitution and democracy alone .
The EU should not fret about interfering in Ukraine &apos;s domestic affairs .
After all , it hesitated little a few years ago to put a current member state , Austria , on notice that it was watching out for the welfare of that country &apos;s democracy .
The wayward Kuchma is far more deserving of Europe imposing safeguards to ensure his good behavior .
Similarly , the US should cast a wary eye at Kuchma &apos;s decision to send troops to Iraq .
It cannot be the case that America &apos;s fidelity to democracy in Ukraine can be so cynically purchased .
Within Ukraine , a government capable of truly governing should seek to adopt EU laws and norms in exactly the manner that the countries poised to join the Union have done , thus helping to clean up the murky system in which Kuchma &apos;s criminal cronies flourish .
The constitution must be reformed , but not to shift power from one unaccountable leader to another .
What is needed are clear checks on arbitrary rule , and transparency in decision-making .
No one should doubt that Kuchma intends to stay in power , no matter what .
Less certain is whether he will feel secure enough to hold a presidential election ( or any other kind of election ) if he cannot change the constitution in a way that guarantees his continued misrule .
It is , after all , President Kuchma who is discredited , not Ukraine &apos;s constitutional arrangements .
A Contagion of Bad Ideas
NEW YORK – The Great Recession of 2008 has morphed into the North Atlantic Recession : it is mainly Europe and the United States , not the major emerging markets , that have become mired in slow growth and high unemployment .
And it is Europe and America that are marching , alone and together , to the denouement of a grand debacle .
A busted bubble led to a massive Keynesian stimulus that averted a much deeper recession , but that also fueled substantial budget deficits .
The response – massive spending cuts – ensures that unacceptably high levels of unemployment ( a vast waste of resources and an oversupply of suffering ) will continue , possibly for years .
The European Union has finally committed itself to helping its financially distressed members .
It had no choice : with financial turmoil threatening to spread from small countries like Greece and Ireland to large ones like Italy and Spain , the euro ’ s very survival was in growing jeopardy .
Europe ’ s leaders recognized that distressed countries ’ debts would become unmanageable unless their economies could grow , and that growth could not be achieved without assistance .
But , even as Europe ’ s leaders promised that help was on the way , they doubled down on the belief that non-crisis countries must cut spending .
The resulting austerity will hinder Europe ’ s growth , and thus that of its most distressed economies : after all , nothing would help Greece more than robust growth in its trading partners .
And low growth will hurt tax revenues , undermining the proclaimed goal of fiscal consolidation .
The discussions before the crisis illustrated how little had been done to repair economic fundamentals .
The European Central Bank ’ s vehement opposition to what is essential to all capitalist economies – the restructuring of failed or insolvent entities ’ debt – is evidence of the continuing fragility of the Western banking system .
The ECB argued that taxpayers should pick up the entire tab for Greece ’ s bad sovereign debt , for fear that any private-sector involvement ( PSI ) would trigger a “ credit event , ” which would force large payouts on credit-default swaps ( CDSs ) , possibly fueling further financial turmoil .
But , if that is a real fear for the ECB – if it is not merely acting on behalf of private lenders – surely it should have demanded that the banks have more capital .
Likewise , the ECB should have barred banks from the risky CDS market , where they are held hostage to ratings agencies ’ decisions about what constitutes a “ credit event . ”
Indeed , one positive achievement by European leaders at the recent Brussels summit was to begin the process of reining in both the ECB and the power of the American ratings agencies .
Indeed , the most curious aspect of the ECB ’ s position was its threat not to accept restructured government bonds as collateral if the ratings agencies decided that the restructuring should be classified as a credit event .
The whole point of restructuring was to discharge debt and make the remainder more manageable .
If the bonds were acceptable as collateral before the restructuring , surely they were safer after the restructuring , and thus equally acceptable .
This episode serves as a reminder that central banks are political institutions , with a political agenda , and that independent central banks tend to be captured ( at least “ cognitively ” ) by the banks that they are supposed to regulate .
And matters are little better on the other side of the Atlantic .
There , the extreme right threatened to shut down the US government , confirming what game theory suggests : when those who are irrationally committed to destruction if they don ’ t get their way confront rational individuals , the former prevail .
As a result , President Barack Obama acquiesced in an unbalanced debt-reduction strategy , with no tax increases – not even for the millionaires who have done so well during the past two decades , and not even by eliminating tax giveaways to oil companies , which undermine economic efficiency and contribute to environmental degradation .
Optimists argue that the short run macroeconomic impact of the deal to raise America ’ s debt ceiling and prevent sovereign default will be limited – roughly $ 25 billion in expenditure cuts in the coming year .
But the payroll-tax cut ( which put more than $ 100 billion into the pockets of ordinary Americans ) was not renewed , and surely business , anticipating the contractionary effects down the line , will be even more reluctant to lend .
The end of the stimulus itself is contractionary .
And , with housing prices continuing to fall , GDP growth faltering , and unemployment remaining stubbornly high ( one of six Americans who would like a full-time job still cannot get one ) , more stimulus , not austerity , is needed – for the sake of balancing the budget as well .
The single most important driver of deficit growth is weak tax revenues , owing to poor economic performance ; the single best remedy would be to put America back to work .
The recent debt deal is a move in the wrong direction .
There has been much concern about financial contagion between Europe and America .
After all , America ’ s financial mismanagement played an important role in triggering Europe ’ s problems , and financial turmoil in Europe would not be good for the US – especially given the fragility of the US banking system and the continuing role it plays in non-transparent CDSs .
But the real problem stems from another form of contagion : bad ideas move easily across borders , and misguided economic notions on both sides of the Atlantic have been reinforcing each other .
The same will be true of the stagnation that those policies bring .
A Cool Calculus of Global Warming
The British government recently issued the most comprehensive study to date of the economic costs and risks of global warming , and of measures that might reduce greenhouse gas emissions , in the hope of averting some of the direst consequences .
Written under the leadership of Sir Nicholas Stern of the London School of Economics , who succeeded me as Chief Economist of the World Bank , the report makes clear that the question is no longer whether we can afford to do anything about global warming , but whether we can afford not to .
The report proposes an agenda whose cost would be equivalent to just 1 % of annual consumption , but would save the world risk equivalent costs that are five times greater .
The reported costs of global warming are higher than in earlier studies because it takes into account the mounting evidence that the process of global warming is highly complex and non-linear , with a non-negligible chance that it may proceed much faster than had previously been thought and that the extent of warming may be much greater than had previously been thought .
Indeed , the study may actually significantly underestimate the costs : for instance , climate change may lead to more weather variability , a possible disappearance or major shift of the Gulf Stream – of particular concern to Europe – and a flourishing of disease .
When I served in 1995 on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , the scientific group that periodically assesses the science of global warming , there was overwhelming evidence that the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere had increased markedly since the beginning of the industrial revolution , that human activity had contributed significantly to those increases , and that they would have profound effects on climate and sea levels .
But few saw , for instance , the Artic ice cap melting as rapidly as now seems to be the case .
Still , some suggest that because we are not certain about how bad global warming will be , we should do little or nothing .
To me , uncertainty should make us act more resolutely today , not less .
As one scientist friend puts it : if you are driving on a mountain road , approaching a cliff , in a car whose brakes may fail , and a fog bank rolls in , should you drive more or less cautiously ?
Global warming is one of those rare instances where the scientific community is more fearful of what may be happening than the population at large .
Scientists have glimpsed what the future may portend .
As the Stern report points out , as usual , the poor are the most vulnerable .
A third of Bangladesh will be underwater by the end of this century .
The Maldives and a host of Pacific Island states will disappear : our twenty-first-century Atlantis .
To an economist , the problem is obvious : polluters are not paying the full costs of the damage they cause .
Pollution is a global externality of enormous proportions .
The advanced countries might mean Bangladesh and the disappearing island states no harm , but no war could be more devastating .
A global externality can best be dealt with by a globally agreed tax rate .
This does not mean an increase in overall taxation , but simply a substitution in each country of a pollution ( carbon ) tax for some current taxes .
It makes much more sense to tax things that are bad , like pollution , than things that are good , like savings and work .
Although President George W. Bush says he believes in markets , in this case he has called for voluntary action .
But it makes far more sense to use the force of markets – the power of incentives – than to rely on goodwill , especially when it comes to oil companies that regard their sole objective as maximizing profits , regardless of the cost to others .
Exxon has reportedly been funding so-called think tanks to undermine confidence in the science of global warming , just as the tobacco industry funded “ research ” to question the validity of statistical findings showing the link between smoking and cancer .
Some companies even seem to celebrate the melting of the polar ice cap , because it will reduce the cost of extracting the oil that lies beneath the Arctic Ocean .
The good news is that there are many ways by which improved incentives could reduce emissions – partly by eliminating the myriad of subsidies for inefficient usages .
The US subsidizes corn-based ethanol , and imposes tariffs on sugar-based ethanol ; hidden in the tax code are billions of dollars of subsidies to the oil and gas industries .
Most importantly , price signals that show the true social costs of energy derived from fossil fuels will encourage innovation and conservation .
Small changes in practices , when replicated by hundreds of millions of people , can make an enormous difference .
For example , simply changing the color of roofs in warm climates to reflect sunlight or planting trees around houses can lead to great savings on energy used for air conditioning .
We have but one planet , and should treasure it .
Global warming is a risk that we simply cannot afford to ignore anymore .
A Cool Head for the Hottest Issues
LONDON – Reading Barack Obama ’ s Dreams from My Father , the US president ’ s beautifully written reflections on his early life and identity , most people are struck by his cool and intellectual approach .
This is not to say that he is unemotional .
Obama can rage and weep .
But he rarely seems to act on the basis of raw sentiment or instinctive prejudice .
Pragmatic and highly intelligent , sooner or later every issue receives the full attention of his forensic curiosity .
Recalling Hillary Clinton ’ s famous Democratic primary television advertisement , Obama , it turns out , is exactly the sort of president that most of us would want to have in the post for that 3 a.m. phone call about an international crisis .
He would not be afraid to act , but he would be prepared to think first .
I do not think , therefore , that Obama will be too vexed by some of the criticism he faces at the end of his first year in office , though he will undoubtedly grimace at the defeat of the Democratic candidate in the special election in Massachusetts to fill Ted Kennedy ’ s old seat .
Obama was praised extravagantly a year ago ; 12 months on , the criticism is over the top , too .
Obama inherited a terrible legacy – recession , financial meltdown , Iraq , Afghanistan .
He has not solved all of these problems .
But it is difficult to see any really bad mistakes , except perhaps allowing himself to be pushed around by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and giving China the impression that he was prepared for a bilateral relationship entirely on China ’ s terms .
That seems to be changing now .
Obama may have come to understand that when you are the leader of the world ’ s only superpower , you need to be feared just a little if you are to be respected .
The left in America criticizes Obama for not turning the economy around already .
The right angrily denounces him as a crypto-communist because he wants every American to have health care .
With a dispassionate eye on the long game , what will the president himself be thinking ?
One issue that Obama is certain to have in his sights is a problem that shadowed the world for years .
When I was growing up in the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s , world peace was based on the nuclear standoff between the US and the Soviet Union .
The main strategic assessment on both sides of the Berlin Wall was that if either side made a wrong move , all of us might end up consumed in the flames of a nuclear holocaust .
This was called , in the geostrategic jargon of the day , “ mutually assured destruction , ” or MAD .
The acronym was entirely appropriate .
We have forgotten those days .
Yet there are still 23,000 nuclear warheads on our planet , with the explosive power of 150,000 Hiroshima bombs .
Terrorist groups would undoubtedly like to get their hands on one .
In all , there are eight nuclear-weapon states – the US , Russia , Britain , France , China , Israel , India , and Pakistan .
North Korea may also have a few bombs .
Iran is believed by many to be trying to develop one .
Other states , which have their own civil nuclear capacity , have the potential to develop a weapon .
The number of countries in this category is bound to increase as the number of nuclear power reactors doubles over the next 20 years .
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) has contained the number of nuclear states .
A conference is to be held in May to renew and review it .
Obama clearly recognizes that the NPT needs to be strengthened in order to prevent countries from turning their civil nuclear-power capacity into weapons .
But Obama also knows that if the existing nuclear states want others to accept tougher restrictions , they will have to cut back their nuclear arsenals .
This is principally an issue for the US and Russia , which possess 95 % of the world ’ s nuclear weapons .
In addition , it would help if the US could take a strong lead by ratifying the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty .
The nuclear issue is one of the biggest items on the Obama agenda .
How it is handled will help to define his presidency .
Even before the talking gets serious in May , there will be the question of Iran to sort out .
Iran says that it seeks no more than its own ability to produce nuclear power .
Disbelief grows with every revelation of secret Iranian facilities and plans , and with every refusal by Iran to negotiate safeguards that would allow for civil use while preventing weaponization .
The US , the European Union , and Russia have tried to engage Iran on this issue , so far without success .
China seems likely to block effective sanctions on Iran because of its close energy relationship with the country .
How China eventually handles this will profoundly affect its standing in the US and Europe .
These are going to be some of the major questions for Obama over the next year and more .
If he gets them right , he can forget about his short-term critics .
Fortunately , he is smart enough to know this .
A Corporate Manifesto
Around the world , countries are undergoing transitions to democracy .
Although democratic development varies , democratization always changes relations between business and government .
In Mexico , for example , liberalization of elections expanded the opposition &apos;s representation in parliament , ending domination of the executive over legislation and policy .
Now small businesses have new opportunities to make their voices heard .
In every country , there are differences in interests and goals within the business community .
Small firms have different interests from large multinationals in areas such as labor relations , tax policy and health care .
The degree to which business interests are fragmented based on policy issues , cronyism or other factors often indicates the degree of distortion in the underlying market economy .
One split divides firms dependent upon import protection from those engaged in international trade .
In many countries , protectionism nurtures &quot; hot-house industries &quot; that cannot compete in world markets .
The influence that bureaucrats enjoy here fosters corruption .
The result is a form of state socialism whose major beneficiary is a well-connected business elite that excludes genuine entrepreneurs and their employees .
Major differences also divide firms that remain publicly owned from those privatized , as well as from those always private .
Public sector firms have incentives to lobby for subsidies , protection and cheap credit .
They use their work forces to stall reform .
Conversely , private firms tend to support a more open and competitive economy and society .
These splits have implications for how business can affect policymaking .
Although every country and region is unique , businesses can forge unified positions based on national goals and a common strategy .
In some Latin American countries , business organizations draw their members from the small business community , companies engaged in international trade , or business leaders who invest in new technologies .
In some countries - say , Nicaragua and El Salvador - economies had so worsened that nearly all business people joined in opposition to the status quo , though disagreements existed about future goals .
Their challenge was to unite many businesspersons and others to argue for opening the economy , reforming fiscal and tax policies , and other fundamental changes .
In Mexico during the 1980s , COPARMEX , the Mexican employer &apos;s association , was one of the few voluntary business associations .
It opposed statist economic policies , as well as the cat &apos;s cradle of business , government , and the vast machinery of the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI ) which governs Mexico .
Throughout the 1980s , COPARMEX lobbied for Mexico to join GATT , implement fiscal and tax reform , and initiate a privatization process .
Today , COPARMEX is the leader in public educational meetings concerning the role of business in a democratic society , communicating a public policy agenda , and the need for free enterprise .
As Latin America , the Philippines and others abandon import substitution and adjust to the international market economy , business interests change as well .
According to Hernan Buchi , an architect of Chile &apos;s economic reforms , some of the strongest opposition came from government-owned enterprises and firms engaged in business with the government .
After Chile embarked upon market reforms , those firms adapted in time .
The public policy interests of business are not fixed , shifting according to changes in the overall economy , trends in domestic and international markets , and the actions of business leaders .
Such shifts occurred in India with the economic reform program begun by Rajiv Ghandi and deepened by finance minister , Manmohan Singh .
Several Indian businesses , especially larger firms , resisted , clinging to benefits protectionist measures introduced under Nehru .
Some firms - particularly companies interested in world markets and dependent upon imports - called for change .
Over time , the association of these companies grew and became the Confederation of Indian Industry .
A vital tool to affect public policy is a national business agenda identifying the highest priority reforms .
The agenda specifies the needed laws and regulations and offers concrete suggestions for change .
For example , the Federation of Egyptian Industry is working on a national agenda including :
1 .
Analyzing policies and forming recommendations ;
2 .
Meeting with members in open forums to discuss alternatives ;
3 .
Publishing in the media to gain input from concerned parties ;
4 .
Formulating policy reform programs ;
5 .
Publicizing the agenda ;
6 .
Advocacy directed at government .
Elsewhere , the Nigerian Association of Chambers of Commerce , Industry , Mines , and Agriculture ( NACCIMA ) used its agenda over several years to coordinate economic reform .
In 1999 , this task assumed critical importance due to the country &apos;s opening to democracy .
A legislative advisory program is another tool business can use to influence public policy .
To shape legislation such programs require :
* sound economic analysis , and background papers readily available for technocrats and others to study ;
* calls to the country &apos;s general interests , as opposed to the interests of particular groups , such as business or labor ;
* broad dissemination , with arrangements made with the media in order to provide even wider coverage .
In their attempts to affect public policy , business organizations influence government personnel , as well as legislators .
In India , although economic policy changes have been made , state-level government officials need to be convinced that reforms benefit their communities before they drop entrenched opposition .
The New Delhi-based PHD Chamber of Commerce has organized 31 business-government dialogues throughout northern India to reach state-level government officials , senior business people and academics .
The seminars :
* instill a &quot; can do &quot; rather than &quot; can &apos;t do &quot; attitude among officials ;
* eliminate the &quot; anti-profit &quot; mentality ;
* expedite permits and licenses by creating one-stop shops in state offices .
In postcommunist countries , where business is often deeply divided , influence on public policy has been catalyzed through strategic coalitions .
Romania &apos;s International Center for Entrepreneurial Studies ( ICES ) found that most business associations were captive to either government-owned enterprises or to firms privatized by the former communist nomenklatura .
ICES began to work with entrepreneurs and found that several sectoral associations - such as software - and small business associations from outlying areas of Romania were pushing for a market economy .
However , they were individually weak and unaware of each other &apos;s efforts .
During a training program on management , the associations began to coalesce .
Today , SABA &apos;s members are implementing a detailed legislative advisory program .
The manner in which business crafts its case can affect the likelihood of success .
Business must define issues to attract popular attention .
Job creation and economic growth are two essential lures .
Other highly visible issues - corporate governance and combating corruption - also attract large followings .
Indeed , the Asian and Russian economic crises raised corporate governance to the first rank of policy issues .
Interlocking relations among companies in South Korea , Indonesia and elsewhere , coupled with the lack of standards and requirement for disclosure , were key factors in Asia &apos;s crisis .
The World Bank , International Monetary Fund , international investors , and domestic constituencies are currently demanding change .
Business organizations in many countries have a unique opportunity to step in and promote reform in order to help reshape the structure of their business environments .
If they fail to do so , the environment may be reshaped around them in adverse ways .
Another strategy to advance economic reform is to combat corruption .
Transparency International , an international nonprofit organization , is mobilizing a broad constituency behind efforts to reform government procurement systems by advocating a code of conduct for government purchases .
Other groups fight corruption in their own countries .
For example , the Ecuadorian Association of Businessmen ( ANDE ) recently launched an anti-corruption program that focused on the root causes of corruption .
A survey of existing laws and regulations found that many of them were contradictory and overlapping .
ANDE proposed creation of a new court by amending the constitution .
It was successful due to strong public support for combating corruption .
The new court is empowered to reconcile or revoke laws that contain conflicts and duplications .
Each firm and business association must decide on the best strategies and tactics to pursue in their countries .
The important thing is for business leaders to get together and respond to these challenges .
A Crisis in Full Flight
MUNICH – For a while , it looked as if the European Central Bank ’ s € 1 trillion credit program to pump liquidity into Europe ’ s banking system had calmed global financial markets .
But now interest rates for Italian and Spanish government bonds are on the rise again , closing in on about 6 % .
Of course , this may not be the breaking point beyond which the debt burden becomes unsustainable .
After all , interest rates in Southern Europe were well above 10 % in the decade before the euro was introduced .
Even Germany at that time had to pay bondholders more than 6 % .
Nevertheless , the markets are clearly signaling growing doubt about whether Spain and Italy will be willing to bear their debt burden .
The main problem is Spain , where private and public-sector foreign debt is larger than that of Greece , Portugal , Ireland , and Italy combined , and , as in Greece , is in the neighborhood of 100 % of GDP ( 93 % to be precise ) .
A quarter of the labor force and half of Spain ’ s youth are unemployed , reflecting the country ’ s loss of competitiveness in the wake of the real-estate bubble inflated by cheap euro credit in the pre-crisis period .
The current-account deficit remains at 3.5 % of GDP , despite the recession-induced decline in imports , while economic contraction will cause Spain to miss its budget-deficit target again .
Moreover , Spain ’ s debt with the ECB ’ s TARGET settlement system rose by € 55 billion ( $ 72 billion ) between February and March , because capital outflows of that amount had to be compensated .
Since July 2011 , Spain ’ s TARGET debt has grown by € 199 billion .
Capital is in full flight , more than offsetting the inflows from 2008-2010 .
The cumulative total since the beginning of the first crisis year ( 2008 ) means that Spain has financed its entire current-account deficit via the printing press .
The picture is little better in Italy , where the current-account balance has swung from a surplus of around 2 % of GDP to a 3 % -of-GDP deficit over the last ten years .
The country ’ s TARGET debt grew by € 76 billion from February to March , with the total since July 2011 reaching € 276 billion .
Italy , too , is being drained of capital ; in fact , the flight of investors accelerated after the ECB ’ s liquidity injection .
It is now clear that the ECB itself has caused a large part of the capital flight from countries like Spain and Italy , because the cheap credit that it offered drove away private capital .
The purpose of the ECB ’ s measures was to re-establish confidence and bring about a recovery of the inter-bank market .
In this , too , it has not really been successful , despite the huge amount of money that it put on the table .
Indeed , now the French are looking wobbly .
As capital fled the country between July 2011 and January 2012 , France ’ s TARGET debt increased by € 95 billion .
France , too , has become uncompetitive , owing to the cheap credit brought by the euro in its initial years .
According to a recent study by Goldman Sachs , the country ’ s price level must drop by an estimated 20 % vis-à-vis the euro average – that is , depreciate in real terms – if the economy is to regain competitiveness within the eurozone .
Italy will have to depreciate by 10-15 % , and Spain by roughly 20 % .
While Greece and Portugal face the need for deflation totaling 30 % and 35 % , respectively , the figures for Spain and Italy are high enough to justify fears about the future development of the eurozone .
These imbalances can be redressed only with great effort , if at all , and only if one accepts a decade of stagnation .
For Greece and Portugal , staying in the eurozone will be a tight squeeze .
There are many who would solve the problem by routing more and more cheap credit through public channels – bailout funds , eurobonds , or the ECB – from the eurozone ’ s healthy core to the troubled South .
But this would unfairly force savers and taxpayers in the core countries to provide capital to the South on terms to which they would never voluntarily agree .
Already German , Dutch , and Finish savings amounting to € 15,000 , € 17,000 , and € 21,000 , respectively , per working person have been converted from marketable investments into mere equalization claims against the ECB .
No one knows what these claims will be worth in the event of a eurozone breakup .
Above all , however , the permanent public provision of cheap credit would ultimately lead to a lingering infirmity , if not to Europe ’ s economic collapse , because the eurozone would become a central management system with state control over investment .
Such systems cannot work , because they eliminate the capital market as the economic system ’ s main steering mechanism .
One cannot help but wonder how thoughtlessly Europe ’ s politicians have started down this slippery slope .
A Crisis in Two Narratives
CHICAGO – With the world ’ s industrial democracies in crisis , two competing narratives of its sources – and appropriate remedies – are emerging .
The first , better-known diagnosis is that demand has collapsed because of high debt accumulated prior to the crisis .
Households ( and countries ) that were most prone to spend cannot borrow any more .
To revive growth , others must be encouraged to spend – governments that can still borrow should run larger deficits , and rock-bottom interest rates should discourage thrifty households from saving .
Under these circumstances , budgetary recklessness is a virtue , at least in the short term .
In the medium term , once growth revives , debt can be paid down and the financial sector curbed so that it does not inflict another crisis on the world .
This narrative – the standard Keynesian line , modified for a debt crisis – is the one to which most government officials , central bankers , and Wall Street economists have subscribed , and needs little elaboration .
Its virtue is that it gives policymakers something clear to do , with promised returns that match the political cycle .
Unfortunately , despite past stimulus , growth is still tepid , and it is increasingly difficult to find sensible new spending that can pay off in the short run .
Attention is therefore shifting to the second narrative , which suggests that the advanced economies ’ fundamental capacity to grow by making useful things has been declining for decades , a trend that was masked by debt-fueled spending .
More such spending will not return these countries to a sustainable growth path .
Instead , they must improve the environment for growth .
The second narrative starts with the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s , an era of rapid growth in the West and Japan .
Several factors , including post-war reconstruction , the resurgence of trade after the protectionist 1930 ’ s , the introduction of new technologies in power , transport , and communications across countries , and expansion of educational attainment , underpinned the long boom .
But , as Tyler Cowen has argued in his book The Great Stagnation , once these “ low-hanging fruit ” were plucked , it became much harder to propel growth from the 1970 ’ s onward .
Meanwhile , as Wolfgang Streeck writes persuasively in New Left Review , democratic governments , facing what seemed , in the 1960 ’ s , like an endless vista of innovation and growth , were quick to expand the welfare state .
But , when growth faltered , this meant that government spending expanded , even as its resources shrank .
For a while , central banks accommodated that spending .
The resulting high inflation created widespread discontent , especially because little growth resulted .
Faith in Keynesian stimulus diminished , though high inflation did reduce public-debt levels .
Central banks then began to focus on low and stable inflation as their primary objective , and became more independent from their political masters .
But deficit spending by governments continued apace , and public debt as a share of GDP in industrial countries climbed steadily from the late 1970 ’ s , this time without inflation to reduce its real value .
Recognizing the need to find new sources of growth , towards the end of Jimmy Carter ’ s presidency , and then under Ronald Reagan , the United States deregulated industry and the financial sector , as did Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom .
Productivity growth increased substantially in these countries over time , which persuaded Continental Europe to adopt reforms of its own , often pushed by the European Commission .
Yet even this growth was not enough , given previous governments ’ generous promises of health care and pensions – promises made even less tenable by rising life expectancy and falling birth rates .
Public debt continued to grow .
And the incomes of the moderately educated middle class failed to benefit from deregulation-led growth ( though it improved their lot as consumers ) .
The most recent phase of the advanced economies ’ frenzied search for growth took different forms .
In some countries , most notably the US , a private-sector credit boom created jobs in low-skilled industries like construction , and precipitated a consumption boom as people borrowed against overvalued houses .
In other countries , like Greece , as well as under regional administrations in Italy and Spain , a government-led hiring spree created secure jobs for the moderately educated .
In this “ fundamental ” narrative , the advanced countries ’ pre-crisis GDP was unsustainable , bolstered by borrowing and unproductive make-work jobs .
More borrowed growth – the Keynesian formula – may create the illusion of normalcy , and may be useful in the immediate aftermath of a deep crisis to calm a panic , but it is no solution to a fundamental growth problem .
If this diagnosis is correct , advanced countries need to focus on reviving innovation and productivity growth over the medium term , and on realigning welfare promises with revenue capacity , while alleviating the pain of the truly destitute in the short run .
For example , Southern Europe ’ s growth potential may consist in deregulating service sectors and reducing employment protection to spur creation of more private-sector jobs for retrenched government workers and unemployed youth .
In the US , the imperative is to improve the match between potential jobs and worker skills .
People understand better than the government what they need and are acting accordingly .
Many women , for example , are leaving low-paying jobs to acquire skills that will open doors to higher-paying positions .
Too little government attention has been focused on such issues , partly because payoffs occur beyond electoral horizons , and partly because the effectiveness of government programs has been mixed .
Tax reform , however , can provide spur retraining and maintain incentives to work , even while fixing gaping fiscal holes .
Three powerful forces , one hopes , will help to create more productive jobs in the future : better use of information and communications technology ( and new ways to make it pay ) , lower-cost energy as alternative sources are harnessed , and sharply rising demand in emerging markets for higher-value-added goods .
The advanced countries have a choice .
They can act as if all is well , except that their consumers are in a funk , and that “ animal spirits ” must be revived through stimulus .
Or they can treat the crisis as a wake-up call to fix what debt has papered over in the last few decades .
For better or worse , the narrative that persuades these countries ’ governments and publics will determine their future – and that of the global economy .
A Crisis of Trust
LONDON – Public trust in financial institutions , and in the authorities that are supposed to regulate them , was an early casualty of the financial crisis .
That is hardly surprising , as previously revered firms revealed that they did not fully understand the very instruments they dealt in or the risks they assumed .
It is difficult not to take some private pleasure in this comeuppance for the Masters of the Universe .
But , unfortunately , if this loss of trust persists , it could be costly for us all .
As Ralph Waldo Emerson remarked , “ Our distrust is very expensive . ”
The Nobel laureate Kenneth Arrow made the point in economic terms almost 40 years ago : “ It can be plausibly argued that much of the economic backwardness in the world can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence . ”
Indeed , much economic research has demonstrated a powerful relationship between the level of trust in a community and its aggregate economic performance .
Without mutual trust , economic activity is severely constrained .
Even within Europe , there is powerful evidence that countries where mutual trust is higher achieve higher levels of investment , particularly through venture capital investment , and are prepared to use more flexible contracts , which are also beneficial for growth and investment .
So if it is true that trust in financial institutions – and in the governments that oversee them – has been damaged by the crisis , we should care a lot , and we should be devising responses which seek to rebuild that trust .
In fact , the evidence for a crisis of trust is rather difficult to interpret .
In the United Kingdom , recent survey results are ambiguous .
Surveys promoted by financial firms tend to show that trust in them has not diminished much , and that people continue to trust them even more than they do the National Health Service or the BBC .
Surveys promoted by the BBC tend to show the reverse .
Banks quote statistics to show that they are more trusted than supermarkets , whereas supermarkets cite evidence that the opposite is true , and are expanding into financial services in the belief that the public will trust them more than they trust the banks , which have had to be expensively bailed out by the government .
The market will prove one side right before too long .
In the United States , there is now a more systematic , independent survey promoted by economists at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business .
Their financial trust index , based on a large-scale survey of financial decision-makers in American households , did show a sharp fall in trust in late 2008 and early 2009 , following the collapse of Lehman Brothers .
That fall in confidence affected banks , the stock market , and the government and its regulators .
Furthermore , the survey showed that declining trust was strongly correlated with financial behavior .
In other words , if your trust in the market and in the way it is regulated fell sharply , you were less likely to deposit money in banks or invest in stocks .
So falling trust had real economic consequences .
Fortunately , the latest survey , published in July this year , shows that trust in banks and bankers has begun to recover , and quite sharply .
This has been positive for the stock market .
There is also a little more confidence in the government ’ s response and in financial regulation than there was at the end of last year .
The latter point , which no doubt reflects the Obama administration ’ s attempts to reform the dysfunctional system it inherited , is particularly important , as the sharpest declines in investment intentions were among those who had lost confidence in the government ’ s ability to regulate .
It would seem that rebuilding confidence in the Federal Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Commission is economically more important than rebuilding trust in Citibank or AIG .
Continuing disputes in Congress about the precise details of reform could , therefore , have an economic cost if a perception that the system will not be overhauled gains ground .
All these data are at an aggregate level and reflect average views among voters and investors .
Yet we also know that individual views are remarkably heterogeneous .
Some people are very trusting of others , and of the firms and institutions with which they do business .
Others are congenitally distrustful .
Researchers at the European University Institute in Florence and UCLA recently demonstrated that there is a relationship between trust and individuals ’ income .
A pan-European opinion survey , which has been carried out for many years , allows us to relate the two .
It asks simple but powerful questions about how far individuals are inclined to trust those with whom they deal .
The data show , intriguingly , that those who show levels of trust well below the average for the country they live in are likely to have lower incomes .
Is that just because low-income people feel that life is unfair and therefore distrust those around them ?
It would seem not , as it is also true that very trusting people also have lower incomes than the average .
In other words , if you diverge markedly from society ’ s average level of trust , you are likely to lose out , either because you are so distrustful of others that you miss out on opportunities for investment and mutually beneficial exchange , or because you are so trusting that you leave yourself open to being cheated and abused .
When anyone I don ’ t know says “ trust me ” – an irritating conversational tic – I usually close my wallet .
Perhaps most academics , who are at the lower end of the skill and qualification-adjusted income scale , do the same .
Maybe we should trust each other more – but not too much .
A Crisis of Understanding
NEW HAVEN – Few economists predicted the current economic crisis , and there is little agreement among them about its ultimate causes .
So , not surprisingly , economists are not in a good position to forecast how quickly it will end , either .
Of course , we all know the proximate causes of an economic crisis : people are not spending , because their incomes have fallen , their jobs are insecure , or both .
But we can take it a step further back : people ’ s income is lower and their jobs are insecure because they were not spending a short time ago – and so on , backwards in time , in a repeating feedback loop .
It is a vicious circle , but where and why did it start ?
Why did it worsen ?
What will reverse it ?
It is to these questions that economists have been unable to offer clear answers .
The state of economic knowledge was just as bad in the Great Depression that followed the 1929 stock market crash .
Economists did not predict that event , either .
In the 1920 ’ s , some warned about an overpriced stock market , but they did not predict a decade-long depression affecting the entire economy .
Late in the Great Depression , in August 1938 , an article by Ralph M. Blagden in The Christian Science Monitor reported an informal set of interviews with US “ professors , banking experts , union leaders , and representatives of business associations and political factions , ” all of whom were given the same question : “ What causes recessions ? ”
The multiplicity of answers seemed bewildering , and did not inspire confidence that anyone knew what was causing the deepest crisis of capitalism .
The causes given were “ distributed widely among government , labor , industry , international politics and policies . ”
They included misguided government interference with markets , high income and capital gains taxes , mistaken monetary policy , pressures towards high wages , monopoly , overstocked inventories , uncertainty caused by the reorganization plan for the Supreme Court , rearmament in Europe and fear of war , government encouragement of labor disputes , a savings glut because of population shrinkage , the passing of the frontier , and easy credit before the depression .
Although economic theory today is much improved , if we ask people about the cause of the current crisis , we will mostly get the same answers .
We would certainly hear some new ones , too : unprecedented real-estate bubbles , a global savings glut , international trade imbalances , exotic financial contracts , sub-prime mortgages , unregulated over-the-counter markets , rating agencies ’ errors , compromised real-estate appraisals , and complacency about counterparty risk .
More likely than not , many or most of these people would be mostly or partly right , for the economic crisis was caused by a confluence of many factors , the chance co-occurrence of a lot of bad things , which pushed the financial system beyond its breaking point .
At that point , the trouble grabbed widespread attention , destroyed public confidence , and set in motion a negative feedback loop .
Our attention , after all , is naturally drawn to the worst events . Precisely because the worst events are statistical outliers , their causes are probably multiple .
Consider the question of predicting events like the January 2010 earthquake in Haiti , which killed more than 200,000 people .
It captured our attention because it was so bad in terms of lives and property damage .
But if one went beyond trying to predict the occurrence of earthquakes to predicting the extent of the damage , one could surely devise a long list of contributing factors – including even political , financial , and insurance factors – that resembles the list of factors that caused the global economic crisis .
Indeed , the crisis knows no end to the list of its causes .
For , in a complicated economic system that feeds back on itself in many ways , events that start a vicious cycle might be as seemingly trivial as the proverbial butterfly in the Amazon , which , by flapping its wings , sets off a chain of events that eventually results in a far-away hurricane .
Chaos theory in mathematics explains such dependency on remote and seemingly trivial initial conditions , and explains why even the extrapolation of apparently precise planetary motion becomes impossible when taken far enough into the future .
Weather forecasters cannot forecast far into the future , either , but at least they have precise mathematical models .
Massive parallel computers are programmed to yield numerical solutions of differential equations derived from the theory of fluid dynamics and thermodynamics . Scientists appear to know the mechanism that generates weather , even if it is inherently difficult to extrapolate very far .
The problem for macroeconomics is that the types of causes mentioned for the current crisis are difficult to systematize .
The mathematical models that macroeconomists have may resemble weather models in some respects , but their structural integrity is not guaranteed by anything like a solid , immutable theory .
The most important new book about the origins of the economic crisis , Carmen Reinhart ’ s and Kenneth Rogoff ’ s This Time Is Different , is essentially a summary of lessons learned from virtually every financial crisis in every country in recorded history .
But the book is almost entirely non-theoretical .
It merely documents recurrent patterns .
Unfortunately , in 800 years of financial history , there is only one example of a really massive worldwide contraction , namely the Great Depression of the 1930 ’ s .
So it is hard to know exactly what to expect in the current contraction based on the Reinhart-Rogoff analysis .
This leaves us trying to use patterns from past , dissimilar crises to try to infer the likely prognosis for the current crisis .
As a result , we simply do not know if the recovery will be solid or disappointing .
Financing the Next Development Agenda
WASHINGTON , DC – As the 2015 target date for the Millennium Development Goals approaches , the United Nations is intensifying its efforts to foster debate about what comes next for promotion of development worldwide .
The outcome of these discussions will shape policies and investment aimed at spurring GDP growth , strengthening human capital , and promoting more inclusive prosperity .
With the global population expected to reach nine billion people by 2050 – a significant proportion of whom will reside in developing or underdeveloped countries – the international community must improve access to education , health care , and employment opportunities worldwide .
Meanwhile , the prospect of a rise in global temperature of more than 2 ° C ( 3.6 ° F ) over pre-industrial levels by the end of this century ( which would trigger global warming ’ s most damaging effects ) calls for higher investment in sustainable urbanization , climate-smart agriculture , and social safety nets .
Both factors challenge us to define , in the longer term , more sustainable patterns of production and consumption .
Governments , civil society , and the private sector must rise to the challenge , cooperating to find and implement creative solutions .
But , first , they must anticipate the associated financing requirements , which will soon surpass the current capacities of governments and international donors , and take action now to activate new , reliable sources of financing .
To start , governments should design targeted , evidence-based policies and support the development of sound institutions .
This would make government services more effective , while helping to catalyze additional development aid from traditional donors and mobilize private-sector resources .
In many countries , there is considerable scope for domestic resource mobilization .
Broadening the tax base , improving tax administration , and closing gaps in the value-added tax could make a significant difference in lower-income countries , where tax revenues account for only about 10-14 % of GDP , compared to 20-30 % of GDP in high-income countries .
More equitable taxation would have a positive impact on governance , another important tool for mobilizing domestic resources .
With improved corporate and public governance and clear transfer-pricing policies , resource-rich countries could shore up their capacity to negotiate fair contracts with extractive industries , balance revenues and expenditures over time , and manage their natural endowments more transparently .
Progress in these areas would help governments to channel their spending more effectively toward those who would benefit the most .
For example , only 8 % of the $ 409 billion spent on fossil-fuel subsidies in 2010 reached the poorest 20 % of the population .
A targeted support program could increase substantially the efficiency of spending , freeing up resources for education , health , and poverty eradication .
Furthermore , promoting financial deepening and inclusiveness could accelerate private-sector growth , creating more opportunities .
Indeed , broader access to financial services would help the estimated 400 million micro , small , and medium-size enterprises in developing countries to prosper , while enabling the 2.5 billion people worldwide who currently lack access to such services to build their assets .
A deeper and more efficient financial sector would also reduce transaction costs and facilitate risk management .
Local-currency bond markets could help to develop domestic investor bases and mobilize domestic savings to support long-term investments .
At the same time , the international community should work to improve the availability and effectiveness of official development assistance .
The ODA target of 0.7 % of GDP – agreed in 2002 at the International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey , Mexico – should motivate countries to increase their contributions .
They can also take steps to make ODA more predictable from year to year .
Donors should structure aid to ensure that it supports sound national development policies and programs , rather than their own narrow interests .
This is particularly relevant as emerging development partners , especially the BRICS ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) , offer new kinds of aid packages that incorporate investment and non-financial assistance .
Private charities , which have been instrumental in promoting innovation in fields such as health care , the environment , and education , could provide valuable insight into channeling aid more effectively .
More generally , improving coordination among donors would help to maximize the impact of aid on the ground .
While ODA remains an important source of financing for fragile and very-low-income countries , it represents only 7 % of net financial flows to developing countries , where foreign direct investment , remittances , long-term debt , and portfolio investment have a larger impact .
Donors should leverage aid to “ grow the pie ” and to diversify financing sources for the world ’ s poorest countries by providing risk guarantees , innovative investment vehicles , debt syndication , and co-financing arrangements .
Attracting even a fraction of the assets held by institutional investors , sovereign-wealth funds , and public pension funds could boost development finance substantially .
Diaspora populations are another major potential source of development financing .
Reducing transfer costs , which average an estimated 9 % of the value of transactions , would put more money into the hands of those who need it most .
Tailoring financial products for diaspora communities could attract resources for investment , while reinforcing migrants ’ ties – economic and otherwise – to their home countries .
Finally , the international community bears a special responsibility for delivering global public goods .
The responsibility to preserve the environment , stem the spread of communicable diseases , strengthen the international financial architecture , enhance developing-country participation in the global trading system , and facilitate the exchange of knowledge lies at the intersection of national development priorities and global interests .
Duty-free , quota-free access to OECD markets , complemented by simpler , more transparent rules of origin , would raise GDP by 1 % in the least-developed countries , lifting millions out of poverty .
Investment in statistical capacity would help governments and businesses worldwide to make better policy decisions , based on a more accurate accounting of the associated costs and benefits .
The challenge of the post-2015 development agenda lies in finding creative solutions to support prosperity , equality , and sustainability .
Together , governments , civil society , international organizations , and the private sector can improve the availability and quality of finance for development , and shape a better future for all .
The Power of Active Citizenship
LONDON – The Congress of South African Trade Unions , the country ’ s largest labor organization , recently held what were billed as the largest popular protests since the end of apartheid , over chronic corruption and state capture .
In Moldova , citizens continue to protest a controversial electoral law that favors the country ’ s two largest political parties , at the expense of smaller movements .
In the United States , professional football players are taking a knee during the national anthem to draw attention to police violence against black people .
As different as these examples of public protest are , they have one thing in common : they reflect efforts by ordinary citizens to hold not just their governments , but also companies and other institutions , to account .
Such actions , and the right of citizens to organize and participate in them , are essential to a vital democratic society , especially during tumultuous times .
There is no doubt that these are tumultuous times .
US President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un have been exchanging incendiary rhetoric , causing many to fear a war on the Korean Peninsula – and perhaps a nuclear clash .
Large-scale natural disasters – hurricanes in Puerto Rico , floods in South Asia , earthquakes in Mexico – have brought massive damage and loss of life , and not nearly enough relief aid .
Moreover , corruption scandals have erupted far beyond South Africa , including in Brazil and South Korea , yet the links between business and government across the world remain complex , close , and opaque .
Far-right populists have made great political strides in Western democracies , most recently in Germany .
And , all the while , income inequality continues to grow .
Against this background , it is easy to see why ordinary people the world over are feeling increasingly helpless .
But it is in the most trying times that we show who we really are .
And , from small gestures between neighbors and large private contributions to crisis-relief efforts by major companies , there have been plenty of stories of humanity , individually and institutionally , that offer reason for hope .
Indeed , such actions , and the sense of personal accountability they reflect , are what enables our societies to progress and thrive .
As we well know , without rules and accountability , government officials and business leaders cannot always be counted on to do the right thing .
Moreover , given their influence over policy and the economy , their ethical and moral failures have far-reaching consequences .
Yet , while the need to hold government to the highest ethical standards is generally agreed ( if not necessarily implemented ) , many argue that companies should be free to pursue profits at any cost .
Like government , however , companies are ultimately run by people in order to serve people ; they must therefore also be accountable to people .
The key to enforcing this accountability is active citizenship .
Taught in schools around the world , from Canada to the United Kingdom , active citizenship means political participation at every level .
It is not just a nice idea ; it a dynamic and vital concept that individuals , organizations , and institutions should be putting into practice every day .
The ethos of active citizenship applies in every sphere .
Speaking up about a controversial issue in a board meeting not so long ago , I felt it was important to note that I was speaking not just as a board member , but also as a person .
That recognition , however trite it may sound , served as a powerful reminder of a broader lesson : that one must maintain one ’ s sense of right and wrong , regardless of the circumstances .
Convincing oneself that a decision is purely pragmatic , in order to avoid knotty ethical questions , is not an option .
If I , as a person , believe in protecting the environment , or seek in my personal life and business to protect my own security and privacy , I cannot abandon those beliefs in the boardroom in the name of profit .
Avoiding active discussion , in an effort not to have to confront the more nuanced ethical implications that might emerge , is no less disingenuous .
Being an active and engaged citizen means being authentic and empathetic .
It means considering not only what an issue means for us , individually , but also how it affects others .
Many have wondered why American football players , who often make millions of dollars per season , are protesting injustice .
The reason is simple : active citizenship means standing up – or kneeling down – for what we believe in , whether it be a government free of corruption or law enforcement free of racism .
An ethos of personal integrity and authenticity may seem powerless in the face of unbridled greed and narcissism .
And yet the difficult and trying times in which we find ourselves reflect the need to place more emphasis , not less , on the values we claim to uphold , and on devising ways to realize those values in our communities and countries .
A Cure for Fiscal Failure ?
CAMBRIDGE – Should more countries create independent fiscal advisory councils to infuse greater objectivity into national budget debates ?
Jailed swindler Bernie Madoff recently summed up a lot of people ’ s feelings about fiscal policy , declaring that “ the whole government is a Ponzi scheme . ”
Perhaps this was just wishful thinking from a man who will die in prison after his own record-breaking $ 50 billion pyramid scheme collapsed in 2008 .
Personally , I suspect Madoff ’ s unenviable place in the record books will be secure for quite a while .
Still , with many of the world ’ s largest governments facing a lethal combination of unsustainable conventional debt , unprecedented old-age pension obligations , and a downshift in growth , one has to wonder what the fiscal plan is .
In a new paper , “ A Decade of Debt , ” Carmen M. Reinhart and I show that general government debt in the United States , including federal , state , and local debt , has now surpassed the record 120 % of GDP reached at the end of World War II .
Japan , of course , is in even worse shape , with government debt totaling more than 200 % of GDP .
Though this is partially offset by foreign-exchange reserves , Japan now faces massive disaster-relief costs – and this on top of its depressing demographic trends .
Many other rich countries ’ debt levels are also uncomfortably close to 150-year highs , despite relative peace in much of the world .
There is a no easy way out .
For now , low world interest rates are restraining debt-service costs , but debt levels can be reduced only very gradually over long periods , whereas real ( inflation-adjusted ) interest rates can rise far more quickly , even for rich countries .
Debt crises tend to come out of the blue , hitting countries whose debt trajectories simply have no room for error or unplanned adversity .
The single most immediate and direct impact of having an independent fiscal policy would be to reign in spending by producing a counterpoint to Panglossian government growth and revenue forecasts .
In principle , an independent and respected advisory council could also force governments to acknowledge the hidden costs of government guarantees and off-balance sheet debts .
It is high time to consider novel approaches .
Of course , no one simple change will eliminate the huge bias towards deficit spending in most modern political systems .
And no one simple change will preclude the risk of future debt and inflation crises .
Many countries require sweeping reforms to make their tax systems more efficient and their entitlement programs – including their pension schemes – more realistic .
The recent advent of fiscal advisory councils is a promising institutional start .
A number of countries , including Denmark , the Netherlands , the US , and Belgium , have long-standing fiscal watchdog agencies , such as the US Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) .
But , while these older institutions have proven enormously useful , they are typically quite constrained .
The CBO , for example , is free to issue long-term fiscal projections based on its own best estimates of growth , but is largely forced to accept politically implausible future “ fixes ” at face value , somewhat neutralizing the potential effectiveness of any critique of deficit policies .
To enhance credibility , a number of governments are gingerly moving towards creating fiscal councils with greater independence , often with central banks as a role model .
The new vanguard includes councils in Sweden , the United Kingdom , Slovenia , and Canada .
The remit of Sweden ’ s fiscal council is particularly broad , giving it a mandate not only to forecast , but also to look more deeply at the motivations and consequences of government policy .
In principle , an independent fiscal council could have provided invaluable help during the financial crisis .
In the US , such an agency could have weighed in on the costs and benefits of bailout plans , perhaps helping to end congressional paralysis and steeling nerves to give taxpayers more upside risk .
It is too much to expect that these new fiscal institutions will become as important or powerful as central banks , at least anytime soon .
There is far more consensus over monetary policy than over fiscal policy .
And fiscal policy is far more complex and multi-dimensional .
Still , the general principle seems like an important step towards fiscal sanity .
Of course , fiscal councils by themselves are not enough , no matter how well designed they are .
It will remain very tempting for each generation to say , “ My grandchildren will be two or three times richer than I , so who cares if they have to pay some debt ? ”
Moreover , the political cycle creates a very strong deficit bias , as leaders seek to embellish feelings of economic health and prosperity by raising visible expenditures at the cost of hidden debts and lower long-term investment .
To resist these powerful pressures , fiscal councils will need to have their work audited periodically by international agencies such as the International Monetary Fund , both to protect their independence and to promote accountability .
To be sure , Bernie Madoff may yet be proved right , and his will not turn out to be the biggest Ponzi scheme ever .
But greater transparency and a more systematic independent evaluation of government policies could be a very helpful step towards solving the perpetual conundrum of outsized deficits .
It is certainly one of the more innovative and promising ideas to emerge from a rather barren policy landscape .
All Quiet on the Currency Front
CAMBRIDGE – The term “ currency wars ” is a catchy way of saying “ competitive devaluation . ”
In the wake of the sharp fall in the value of the yen over the last six months , owing to the monetary component of Japan ’ s efforts to jump-start its economy , the issue is expected to feature prominently on the agenda at the G-8 ’ s upcoming summit in Northern Ireland .
But should it ?
According to the International Monetary Fund , competitive devaluation occurs when countries are “ manipulating exchange rates … to gain an unfair competitive advantage over other members … ” But a key point is often missed when the term “ currency wars ” has been applied to monetary expansion by the Federal Reserve , the Bank of Japan , and other central banks in recent years .
The impact of monetary stimulus on a country ’ s trade balance – and hence on demand for trading partners ’ goods – is ambiguous : the expenditure-switching effect when the exchange rate responds is counteracted by the expenditure-increasing effect of expansion .
Restored income growth means more imports from other countries .
“ Currency wars ” is a more apt description when countries intervene to push down their currencies in deliberate attempts to help their trade balances .
But national authorities will and should pursue economic policies that are primarily in their own countries ’ interests .
International cooperation can be fruitful ; but there is little point attempting it if the nature of the spillover effects is not relatively clear to all .
Everyone agrees , for example , that spillovers from pollution or tariffs are negative , not positive , externalities .
But the case is not as obvious in the case of monetary policy .
For example , if unemployment is high and inflation low in the United States , the Fed will naturally ease monetary policy , particularly via low interest rates .
If Brazil is in danger of overheating , its central bank will naturally tighten policy , particularly via high interest rates .
It is also natural that capital will flow from north to south as a result , causing the Brazilian real to appreciate against the dollar .
That is the beauty of floating exchange rates : both countries can choose their own appropriate policies .
Given that the two countries ’ are in different cyclical positions , such exchange-rate movements signal that the international economic system is working properly .
Although the stronger real will help US exporters ( other things being equal ) and hurt those in Brazil , such “ casualties of war ” are not even collateral damage ; rather , they are precisely the point .
If the goal is to stimulate demand for US goods and dampen demand for Brazilian goods , why shouldn ’ t exporters in both countries share in that process , alongside construction and other sectors that are sensitive to interest rates via domestic demand ?
A more serious dilemma arises if one of the countries is targeting or even fixing the exchange rate , as many Latin American governments did to kill off high inflation in the late 1980 ’ s and early 1990 ’ s .
Such a country will not necessarily want to abandon a proven exchange-rate regime at the first sign of trouble .
Capital controls and sterilization of reserve flows might help to delay the adjustment , but a persistent one-directional capital flow will eventually force the fixed-exchange-rate country to allow either its exchange rate or its money supply to adjust .
True , in recent years , a wide array of countries has indicated a preference for weaker currencies as a means of improving their trade balances .
It is also true , by definition , that not everyone can depreciate or improve their trade balance at the same time .
But that does not necessarily mean that depreciators are guilty of violating any agreements or norms , especially if they have merely maintained a pre-existing exchange-rate regime .
Uncoordinated monetary expansion does not even necessarily leave the world in a worse equilibrium .
Barry Eichengreen and Jeffrey Sachs have persuasively argued this for the 1930 ’ s ( the opposite of the conventional wisdom regarding beggar-thy-neighbor competitive devaluations ) .
Although all countries could not improve their trade balances simultaneously , when they devalued against gold , they succeeded in raising the price of gold , thereby increasing the real value of the global money supply – exactly what a world in depression needed .
The same applies today .
Brazil ’ s finance minister , Guido Mantega , coined the term “ currency wars ” in response to American efforts to enlist Brazil and other competitors of China in a campaign for a stronger renminbi .
But the accusation against the US is especially misplaced .
US monetary expansion contributed to global monetary expansion at a time when , on average , it was needed .
US authorities have not intervened in the foreign-exchange market or talked down the dollar , and currency depreciation was not the Fed ’ s goal when deciding to implement its quantitative-easing policy .
Japan comes a little closer to qualifying as a currency warrior , because members of Shinzo Abe ’ s government were initially foolish enough to mention yen depreciation as an explicit goal .
China qualifies in one important respect : the renminbi was substantially undervalued by most measures from 2004 to 2009 ( less so now ) .
But countries have a right to opt for fixed exchange rates .
Continuing an existing regime , as China was doing , does not sound very much like “ manipulation . ”
True , renminbi appreciation was probably in China ’ s interest .
It would have been reasonable , beginning in 2004 , for those worried about current-account imbalances to propose that China voluntarily allow some appreciation in exchange for , say , the US putting its fiscal house in order .
But this is different from accusing Beijing of violating international norms or rules and threatening retaliation ( for example , by imposing tariffs , which is a violation of international rules ) .
Few countries accused of participating in a currency war have undertaken discrete devaluations in recent years or acted to weaken their currencies by switching their exchange-rate regimes .
These are the sorts of deliberate policy changes connoted by a term like “ manipulation . ”
Switzerland perhaps comes the closest .
But the franc was so strong , even at the new rate set in September 2011 , that no one can accuse the Swiss National Bank of unfair undervaluation .
The world has enough serious disputes as it is .
We do not need to invent new ones .
Read an extended version of this argument in Jeffrey Frankel ’ s blog post , “ Dispatches from the Currency Wars . ”
A Customs Union for the Balkans
The fall of Milosevic does not cure the political woes of the Balkans ; indeed , it raises their urgency .
Yugoslavia has disintegrated , but the disintegration is incomplete .
It was in Yugoslavia that Vojislav Kostunica was elected president , but his mandate comes solely from support in Serbia .
Montenegro , Serbia ’ s junior partner in the Yugoslav federation , mostly boycotted the election while Albanians in Kosovo ignored them .
Yet it was Yugoslavia , whose foundations are unstable , that was recently admitted to the UN .
A host of problems remain unresolved : relations between Serbia and Montenegro and the status of Kosovo ( not to mention Serbia ’ s northern province of Vojvodina ) .
Any resolution – any suggestion of change – will engender new conflicts because of conflicting claims of sovereignty .
However tempting it may be to solve the puzzle by drawing new borders or establishing new entities , this conundrum cannot be resolved in terms of sovereignty .
That traditional solution would only perpetuate the problems of the Balkans .
A new approach is needed : the European Union should use the prospect of European integration as the way to promote regional integration .
The EU could act as a magnet to bring the region closer together by bringing the region as a whole closer to Europe .
This idea has great appeal to people in the region , but only the EU can make it happen .
After NATO intervention in Kosovo , European leaders made this approach the cornerstone of their vision for the Balkans .
It was enshrined in the Stability Pact signed at the Sarajevo Summit of July , 1999 .
But the Stability Pact is merely a shell – it needs to be filled with content .
The time to do so is at the Zagreb Conference on November 24 called by France as the current EU president .
The European Union should now propose a three-point plan for the Balkans :
$ a customs union with preferential access to EU markets within one year .
The existing EU-Turkey customs union should be used as a model .
Once all these countries reach agreement with the EU there would automatically be free trade throughout the Balkans .
This will take some time to implement .
But from the start , the EU should give a signal by unilaterally opening its border to imports from the region .
This cannot endanger any EU interests as the countries at issue now have far less than 1 % of the EU market .
$ a regional VAT to replace the lost customs revenues should be established within two years .
Differences in indirect taxes such as VAT pose another way in which borders become obstacles to trade .
They should be unified throughout the region .
Regional VAT rates might be increased slightly if expenditure restraint is not sufficient to offset the loss of tariff revenues due to the customs union .
$ Temporary budgetary support on a declining scale for three years , subject to EU supervision over budgetary expenditures .
Because it will take time to collect revenues from the regional VAT , the EU should provide financial help during the transition .
The area covered by this plan would include Bulgaria , Croatia and Albania as well as Serbia , Bosnia , Macedonia , Montenegro and Kosovo .
Participation by Romania and Moldova is optional .
Bulgaria and Croatia could be persuaded to participate provided it would not interfere with their candidacy for EU membership .
Depending on the country , there could be more or less budgetary support .
( Bulgaria , for example , might not need compensation since to a great extent it has already eliminated tariffs ) .
In comparison to the cost of military intervention and peacekeeping , the financial costs here are ridiculously low .
I estimate that Euro 750 million in the first year , Euro 500 million in the second year and Euro 250 million in the third year would do the trick .
( If Romania and Moldova were included the figures would be slightly higher ) .
These figures are well within range of pledges already made by the EU for the Stability Pact and they could be easily accommodated within the confines of the Berlin Accord on the EU budget for 2000-2005 if EU member states agree to a reallocation of unspent funds .
Budgetary support in the context of a Customs Union would be a more effective way to disburse EU funds than conventional methods .
This three-point program would lay the ground for economic resurgence .
It would remove two major sources of corruption and inefficiency : the customs service and the misuse of public funds in general .
It would create a trade area large enough to generate both local and foreign investment .
The Deutsche Mark , already widely used in the region , now functions as the de facto common currency .
Any ban on its use should be lifted to make borders irrelevant for trade and investment .
Improved economic prospects and the strengthening of institutions , in turn , would have a positive impact on the political climate throughout the Balkans .
Serbia has climbed part of the way out of the abyss .
Success in peacefully removing a tyrant has set in motion a process of national renewal .
But that process has a long way to go .
The opposition inherited a bankrupt country whose institutions are in ruins .
The population , frustrated by ever deepening impoverishment and isolation , is beginning to question what happened over the past decade in Serbia .
People are asking about crimes committed by the Milosevic regime against Serbs .
They must begin to come to terms with the crimes committed against others - in Croatia , Bosnia and Kosovo .
Once that process is underway , many problems that now seem intractable will be resolved more easily .
Kostunica ’ s election as President of Yugoslavia amounts to an incomplete revolution : many of the old guard are still in place .
The momentum created by Milosevic ’ s overthrow needs to be maintained .
Milosevic was overthrown in the hope of ending Serbia ’ s isolation .
Europe must now fulfill its promise .
If the French Presidency fails to seize the moment in Zagreb , an historic opportunity will be lost .
A Czech Moment
PRAGUE – As I listened to what some Europeans were saying as my country prepared to take over the presidency of the European Union , I heard dim echoes of Neville Chamberlain ’ s infamous description of Czechoslovakia as “ a faraway country of which we know little . ”
I suppose that Donald Rumsfeld ’ s misguided bid a few years ago to incite a divide between “ new and old ” Europe contributed to the re-emergence of that disdainful attitude .
The reality is that there is no such thing as “ old and new ” Europe , and there never was .
The break with communism and reunification of Europe is now almost two decades old .
We Czechs are 100 % European , and were even when the Iron Curtain cut us off from democratic Europe .
Indeed , our pro-EU sentiments may be all the stronger because our membership in the Union , like our freedom , is so comparatively new .
So no one in Europe needs to fear that the Czech Republic has some nostalgic or idiosyncratic agenda that it wants to impose on the Union .
On the contrary , events have imposed an agenda on Europe that we cannot escape and for which solidarity – true union – will be needed .
The primary , and most pressing , of the problems we face is the financial and economic crisis that is enveloping the EU .
Unfortunately , conditions across the Union will likely worsen before they begin to improve .
The type of social unrest recently witnessed in Greece may spread , because the downturn is likely to take a disproportionate toll on Europe ’ s young people , who are seeking jobs at a time when hard-pressed European businesses will be able to offer them very few .
It will fall to the Union , once again , to help transform despair into hope .
We Czechs know something about this , as the wrenching economic transition that we underwent in the 1990 ’ s taught us much about how the right policies can break the grip of hopelessness .
To contain today ’ s financial and economic crisis , Europe will also need to continue the cooperation that it has shown up to this point .
The very existence of our Union , and particularly of the euro , has already helped to prevent the competitive devaluations and beggar-thy-neighbor policies that ravaged Europe during the 1930 ’ s – the last time the continent faced so brutal an economic downturn .
But we cannot be complacent that the forces of national egoism will remain in check .
For now , EU governments ’ coordinated fiscal stimulus has deprived populists of their usual charge that the EU is indifferent to the fate of individuals .
Even more policy coordination will be needed both to confront the crisis and to re-establish EU norms once the storm clouds begin to dissipate .
Although it is right that the Stability and Growth Pact has become more flexible in these extraordinary times , its rules did secure a successful first decade for the euro .
These rules must eventually be restored intact if Europe is to return to the path of sustainable growth , and a consensus will need to be forged now to make that happen .
The second key challenge that we will face during our European presidency is that of Russia .
A new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( PCA ) between the EU and the Russian Federation must be negotiated .
Those negotiations should have begun seriously last year , but the war in Georgia intervened to put them on hold .
Now those talks have resumed , but the background to the negotiations has changed dramatically .
Russia ’ s economy is now in far worse shape than that of EU members .
The collapse of world oil and gas prices has wounded Russia ’ s budget , and lack of investment in the country ’ s energy sector over the years is now causing the declining production that economists have long predicted .
Until now , Russia has cared less about a new PCA than the EU , because two-thirds of Russia ’ s exports to the Union comprise natural resources , which bring in cash even without the strong rules that a PCA provides .
Given the stark changes in economic conditions , however , it is now in Russia ’ s national interest to reassure international markets that it is a reliable place to do business , for which a new PCA would serve as an ideal signal .
Moreover , without a new PCA , individual European countries may feel it necessary to seek even more bilateral agreements with Russia .
Indeed , many EU members have been in a race with each other to see who will be Russia ’ s closest friend in the Union .
But the bilateral deals that have emerged from this race sometimes come at the expense of other Union members , and may unbalance relations within the Union as a whole . Only a rules-based EU framework can provide a firm foundation for both bilateral and Union-wide relations with Russia .
Europe ’ s main strength in foreign policy is not its commitment to a rules-based multilateralism , important as that undoubtedly is , but its unity .
When the Georgia crisis erupted , Europe united around a single position on Russia ’ s withdrawal .
It is the Czech Republic ’ s task , and that of the Swedish EU presidency that will follow our own , to maintain this unity as the PCA negotiations move forward .
During the 1990 ’ s , the US and Europe erred in treating Russia with benign neglect . It would be a mistake for Russia to respond in kind today by seeking to prolong the PCA negotiations in the hope that a possibly more amenable EU president may one day offer softer terms .
We , like all EU presidencies , will be representing the wider Union interests when we negotiate .
Debt and Demand
LONDON – Former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers recently caused a stir with his warning of sustained economic stagnation in the advanced economies .
But , while many reject his suggestion of a secular trend , the data support him .
Yes , economic growth has picked up in the United States and the United Kingdom , while the eurozone economy is no longer contracting and Japan shows some signs of responding to “ Abenomics . ”
But the global recovery remains extremely weak , with most advanced economies still performing at 10-15 % below pre-crisis growth trends .
It is not difficult to see why the recovery has been anemic .
Excessive private-debt creation before the crisis and subsequent attempts at deleveraging have weakened demand considerably .
While fiscal deficits can help to offset deficient demand , they also result in rising public debt .
Leverage has not gone away ; it has simply shifted to the public sector – creating a debt overhang that may last for many years , or even decades .
Eliminating it will likely require significant debt write-offs or permanent monetization .
But , as Summers noted , the party that preceded this severe post-crisis hangover was not , in terms of actual growth , all that exuberant .
Credit volumes and asset prices soared , but labor markets did not overheat , real earnings remained flat in many advanced economies , and inflation rates were remarkably stable .
Nominal demand grew at roughly 5 % annually , despite annual credit growth of 10 % or more .
Today , the same pattern is unfolding in many emerging economies – most notably , China .
With credit growth far outpacing nominal GDP growth , leverage is increasing .
And it seems that the rising credit intensity of GDP growth ( the amount of new credit required to generate a unit of output ) is needed to ensure that economic performance remains in line with potential .
This implies a serious dilemma : while rising leverage is apparently essential , it inevitably leads to crisis and recession .
Against this background , policymakers must consider whether rapid credit growth is really necessary , and whether there are any alternatives – a question that modern economics has so far largely ignored .
In fact , much credit growth is not critical to economic growth , because it does not play a direct role in financing consumption or investment .
Economics textbooks often describe how households deposit money in banks , which lend to businesses to finance capital investment .
But , in advanced economies – and increasingly in emerging economies – this story is largely fictional , because such lending accounts for only a small share of the total .
Instead , a large part of bank lending finances the purchase of existing assets , particularly commercial or residential real estate , the prices of which primarily reflect the value of the underlying land .
Such existing-asset finance does not directly stimulate investment or consumption .
But it does drive up asset prices , causing lenders and borrowers to believe that even more credit growth is both safe and desirable .
Lending to finance existing assets , primarily in real-estate markets , can thus play an asymmetric role in the real economy .
While it has little impact on demand , output , and prices during the boom , it results in debt overhang , deleveraging , and depressed demand in the post-crisis period .
In this context , policymakers should distinguish between categories of debt .
For example , they could impose higher capital requirements on real-estate lending or introduce direct borrower constraints like limits on loan-to-value or loan-to-income ratios .
Such policies would help to reduce the credit intensity of growth , thereby curbing the threat to long-term economic stability .
Nonetheless , the problem of deficient demand might persist .
Even though such lending does not stimulate demand for newly produced goods and services directly , it may do so indirectly by generating unsustainable wealth effects ( driving people to spend more because they feel richer ) .
Constraining the lending that drives up real-estate prices could lead to lower nominal demand .
Curtailing demand for this category of credit would lower the real ( inflation-adjusted ) interest rate .
But we cannot assume that this would offset the deflationary impact of reduced wealth effects .
Even before the crisis , real long-term interest rates were on a clear downward trajectory , with 20-year index-linked yields falling from almost 4 % in 1990 to below 2 % by 2007 .
Whether even lower interest rates would have stimulated significant additional investment is unclear .
The fundamental question therefore remains : Is there something about modern economies that makes adequate demand growth impossible without damaging credit growth ?
Rising inequality is one driver of this apparent “ need for credit . ”
Wealthier people have a higher marginal propensity to save than poorer people .
As the rich get richer , consumption growth may decline , unless the financial system uses their savings to lend to the relatively poor .
But much of this debt may prove unsustainable .
As Raghuram Rajan pointed out in his book Fault Lines , the US subprime-mortgage boom and bust owed much to pitiably slow growth in lower-income Americans ’ real earnings over the last three decades .
Global imbalances also contribute to rising debt risk .
If current-account surpluses are not matched by rising equity claims against the rest of the world – whether through corporate foreign direct investment or household-equity investments in other countries – they inevitably result in debt claims , increasing public or private debt liabilities in deficit countries .
Some of those debt claims will likely prove unsustainable , and all of them may contribute to post-crisis debt-overhang effects .
A more stable growth model requires less of the “ wrong type of debt ” – that is , debt that finances purchases of existing assets , supports consumption without addressing the drivers of inequality , or results from unsustainable global imbalances .
Without targeted policies aimed at limiting such debt , the world economy risks secular stagnation or further cycles of instability and crisis .
Read More from &quot; Germany versus the Euro ? &quot;
In Praise of Fragmentation
LONDON – Emerging markets are back in the spotlight .
Investors and banks are suddenly unwilling to finance current-account deficits with short-term debt .
South Africa , for example , has had to increase interest rates , despite slow economic growth , to attract the funding it needs .
Turkey ’ s rate increase has been dramatic .
For these and other emerging countries , 2014 may prove to be a turbulent year .
If volatility becomes extreme , some countries may consider imposing constraints on capital outflows , which the International Monetary Fund now agrees might be useful in specific circumstances .
But the fundamental question is how to manage the impact of short-term capital inflows .
Until recently , economic orthodoxy considered that question invalid .
Financial liberalization was lauded because it enabled capital to flow to where it would be used most productively , increasing national and global growth .
But empirical support for the benefits of capital-account liberalization is weak .
The most successful development stories in economic history – Japan and South Korea – featured significant domestic financial repression and capital controls , which accompanied several decades of rapid growth .
Likewise , most cross-country studies have found no evidence that capital-account liberalization is good for growth .
As the economist Jagdish Bhagwati pointed out 16 years ago in his article “ The Capital Myth , ” there are fundamental differences between trade in widgets and trade in dollars .
The case for liberalizing trade in goods and services is strong ; the case for complete capital-account liberalization is not .
One reason is that many modern financial flows do not play the useful role in capital allocation that economic theory assumes .
Before World War I , capital flowed in one direction : from rich countries with excess savings , such as the United Kingdom , to countries like Australia or Argentina , whose investment needs exceeded domestic savings .
But in today ’ s world , net capital flows are often from relatively poor countries to rich countries .
Huge two-way gross capital flows are driven by transient changes in perception , with carry-trade opportunities ( borrowing in low-yielding currencies to finance lending in high-yielding ones ) replacing long-term capital investment .
Moreover , capital inflows frequently finance consumption or unsustainable real-estate booms .
And yet , despite the growing evidence to the contrary , the assumption that all capital flows are beneficial has proved remarkably resilient .
That reflects the power not only of vested interests but also of established ideas .
Empirical falsification of a prevailing orthodoxy is disturbing .
Even economists who find no evidence that capital-account liberalization boosts growth often feel obliged to stress that “ further analysis ” might at last reveal the benefits that free-market theory suggests must exist .
It is time to stop looking for these non-existent benefits , and to distinguish among different categories of capital flows .
Some are valuable , but some are potentially harmful .
Foreign direct investment ( FDI ) , for example , can aid growth , because it is long term , involves investment in the real economy , and is often accompanied by technology or skill transfers .
Equity portfolio investment may involve price volatility as ownership positions change , but at least it implies a permanent commitment of capital to a business enterprise .
Long-term debt finance of real capital investment can play a useful role as well .
By contrast , short-term capital flows , particularly if provided by banks that are themselves relying on short-term funding , can create instability risks , while bringing few benefits .
What is less clear is the best policy response .
Capital controls are invariably porous , and we cannot gain the benefits of free trade and FDI without creating some opportunities for short-term investor positioning .
China has not liberalized its capital account , but short-term inflows are now driving stronger upward pressure on the renminbi ( and larger offsetting reserve accumulation by the People ’ s Bank of China ) than can be explained by the current-account surplus and FDI flows .
A case can thus be made for capital-account liberalization that is based on the impossibility of effective control , not on any supposed benefits .
But while perfect policy is unattainable , partly effective controls can still play a useful role if targeted at the interface between short-term inflows and domestic credit cycles .
After all , capital inflows cause the greatest harm when they drive rapid increases in credit-financed consumption or real-estate speculation .
The required policy response should integrate domestic financial regulation with capital-account management .
Tax instruments and reserve requirements that put sand in the wheels of short-term capital inflows should be combined with strong countercyclical measures , such as additional capital requirements , to slow domestic credit creation .
The effectiveness of such measures can be undermined if global banks operate in emerging countries in branch form , providing domestic credit financed by global funding pools .
But this danger can be countered by requiring banks to operate as legally incorporated subsidiaries , with locally regulated capital and liquidity reserves , and strong regulatory limits on the maturity of their funding .
Such requirements would not prevent useful capital flows : global banking groups could invest equity in emerging markets and fund their subsidiaries ’ balance sheets with long-term debt .
In banking , as in other sectors , investment that combines long-term commitment with skill transfer can be highly beneficial , which implies that foreign banks should be free to compete on the same basis as domestic banks .
Neither mandatory subsidiarization nor tax- or regulation-based capital controls will solve all of the problems .
But , taken together , they can stem the volatility implied by short-term flows and help to smooth out domestic credit cycles .
Much of the financial industry resists such measures , as do the many economists who remain wedded to the old orthodoxy .
Renewed capital controls , they claim , would “ fragment ” the global financial market , undermining its ability to allocate capital efficiently .
In the past , policymakers have been at pains to stress that no such fragmentation will be allowed .
But we need to be blunt : Free flows of short-term debt can result in capital misallocation and harmful instability .
When it comes to global capital markets , fragmentation can be a good thing .
The High-Tech , High-Touch Economy
LONDON – A recent report revealed that the five richest families in Britain are worth more than the country ’ s poorest 20 % combined .
Some of the wealth comes from new business ventures ; but two of the five are a duke and an earl whose ancestors owned the fields across which London expanded in the nineteenth century .
Urban land wealth is not just a London phenomenon .
As Thomas Piketty ’ s recent book Capital in the Twenty-First Century shows , accumulated wealth has grown rapidly relative to income across the advanced economies over the last 40 years .
In many countries , the majority of that wealth – and the lion ’ s share of the increase – is accounted for by housing and commercial real estate , and most of that wealth resides not in the value of the buildings , but in the value of the urban land on which it sits .
That might seem odd .
Though we live in the hi-tech virtual world of the Internet , the value of the most physical thing – land – is rising relentlessly .
But there is no contradiction : The price of land is rising because of rapid technological progress .
In an age of information and communication technology ( ICT ) , it is inevitable that we value what an ICT-intensive economy cannot create .
ICT has already delivered remarkable new products and services ; but , as MIT ’ s Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee argue persuasively in their recent book The Second Machine Age , the really dramatic changes are yet to come , with robots and software bound to automate out of existence a huge number of jobs .
One consequence is the striking phenomenon of huge wealth creation with very little labor input .
Facebook has an equity valuation of $ 170 billion but employs only around 6,000 people .
The investment that went into building the software that runs it entailed no more than around 5,000 software engineer man-years .
This remarkable technology has helped to deliver increasing average incomes and will continue to do so .
But the distribution of that bounty has been very unequal .
The lion ’ s share of the growth has gone to the top half , the top 10 % , or even the top 1 % of the population .
As the better off become richer , however , much of their rising income will not be spent on ICT-intensive goods and services .
There is a limit to how many iPads and smart phones one can need , and their price continues to plummet .
Instead , an increasing share of consumer expenditure is devoted to buying goods and services that are rich in fashion , design , and subjective brand values , and to competing for ownership of location-specific real estate .
But if the land on which the desired houses and apartments sit is in limited supply , the inevitable consequence is rising prices .
Urban land is therefore rising in value – in London , New York , Shanghai , and many other cities – partly because of consumer demand .
But its rising value also makes it an attractive asset class for investors , because further price increases are expected .
Moreover , returns on real estate have been swollen by the dramatic fall in interest rates over the last 25 years , a decline that was far advanced even before the 2008 financial crisis .
The cause of those low interest rates is debated ; but one probable factor is the reduced cost of business investment in hardware and software-based “ machines . ”
If you can build a $ 170 billion company with just 5,000 software engineer man-years , you don ’ t need to borrow much money .
The fact that technology is so powerful not only makes physical land more valuable ; it also means that future employment growth will be concentrated among the jobs that cannot be automated , particularly in services , which have to be delivered physically .
The US Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that among the most rapidly growing occupational categories over the next ten years will be “ healthcare support occupations ” ( nursing aides , orderlies , and attendants ) and “ food preparation and serving workers ” – that is , overwhelmingly low-wage jobs .
In short , ICT creates an economy that is both “ hi-tech ” and “ hi-touch ” – a world of robots and apps , but also of fashion , design , land , and face-to-face services .
This economy is the result of our remarkable ability to solve the problem of production and automate away the need for continual labor .
But it is an economy that is likely to suffer two adverse side effects .
First , it may be inherently unstable , because the more that wealth resides in real estate , the more the financial system will provide leverage to support real-estate speculation , which has been at the heart of all of the world ’ s worst financial crises .
Major changes in financial and monetary policy , going far beyond those introduced in response to the 2008 crisis , are required to contain this danger .
Second , unless we deliberately design policies that encourage and sustain inclusive growth , a highly unequal society is virtually inevitable , with rising land values and wealth magnifying the effects of the unequal income distribution that ICT produces directly .
Indeed , the modern economy may resemble that of the eighteenth century , when the land owned by the Duke of Westminster and the Earl of Cadogan was still just fields to the west of London , more than the middle-class societies in which most developed countries ’ citizens ’ grew up .
The Trade Delusion
LONDON – Since 2008 , global trade has grown slightly more slowly than global GDP .
The Doha Round of World Trade Organization negotiations ended in failure .
Transatlantic and transpacific trade negotiations are progressing slowly , held back by the resistance of special interests .
But , though many experts fear that protectionism is undermining globalization , threatening to impede global economic growth , slower growth in global trade may be inevitable , and trade liberalization is decreasingly important .
To be sure , for 65 years , rapid trade growth has played a vital role in economic development , with average advanced-economy industrial tariffs plummeting from more than 30 % to below 5 % .
The creation of Europe ’ s single market facilitated increased intra-European trade .
Japan , South Korea , and Taiwan achieved rapid economic catch-up on the basis of export-led growth .
China has followed the same path over the last 30 years .
Trade grew about twice as fast as global output from 1990 to 2008 .
But there is no reason why trade should grow faster than GDP forever .
Indeed , even if there were no trade barriers at all , trade might grow significantly more slowly than GDP in some periods .
Several factors make it possible that we are entering such a period .
For starters , there is the changing pattern of consumption in the advanced economies .
Richer people spend an increasing share of their income on services that are either impossible to trade ( for example , restaurant meals ) or difficult to trade ( such as health services ) .
Non-tradable sectors tend to account for a growing share of employment and economic activity .
For several decades , that tendency has been offset by ever more intensive trading of tradable goods , often passing through many countries in complex supply chains .
In the future , however , the shift to non-tradable consumption may dominate .
Indeed , trade intensity may decline even for manufactured goods .
Trade is partly driven by differences in labor costs .
China ’ s dramatic manufacturing growth reflected low wages up to now .
But as real wages in China and other emerging economies grow , incentives for trade will decline .
The more that global incomes converge , the less trade there may be .
In addition , as the economists Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee of MIT have argued in their book The Second Machine Age , rapid advances in information technology may enable increasingly extensive automation .
Some manufacturing activities , though few jobs , may well return to developed countries , as the advantages of proximity to customers and lower transport costs outweigh decreasingly important differences in labor costs .
Global trade as a share of GDP may therefore decline , but without adverse consequences for global economic growth .
Rising productivity does not require relentlessly increasing trade intensity .
Earth , after all , does not trade with other planets , yet its economy still grows .
Optimal trade intensity depends on many factors – such as relative labor costs , transport costs , productivity levels , and economy-of-scale effects .
Trends in these factors might make reduced trade intensity not only inevitable but desirable .
Even if that is true , international trade will still play a vital role , and preventing any reversal of past trade liberalization is essential .
But further trade liberalization is bound to be of declining importance to economic growth .
With industrial tariffs already dramatically reduced most potential benefits of trade liberalization have already been grasped .
Estimates of the benefits of further trade liberalization are often surprisingly low – no more than a few percentage points of global GDP .
That is small compared to the cost of the 2008 financial crisis , which has left output in several advanced economies 10-15 % below pre-crisis trend levels .
It is small , too , compared to the difference in economic performance between successful catch-up countries – such as China – and other countries that have enjoyed the same access to global markets but have performed less well for other reasons .
The main reason for slow progress in trade negotiations is not increasing protectionism ; it is the fact that further liberalization entails complex trade-offs no longer offset by very large potential benefits .
The Doha Round ’ s failure has been decried as a setback for developing countries .
And some liberalization – say , of advanced economies ’ cotton imports – would undoubtedly benefit some low-income economies .
But full trade liberalization would have a complex impact on the least developed economies , some of which would benefit only if compensated for the loss of the preferential access to advanced-economy markets that they currently enjoy .
This implies that further progress in trade liberalization will be slow .
But slow progress is a far less important challenge to growth prospects than the debt overhang in developed economies , or infrastructure and educational deficiencies in many developing economies .
That reality often goes unacknowledged .
The importance of past trade liberalization has left the global policy establishment with a bias toward assuming that further liberalization would bring similar benefits .
But while the potential global benefits of trade liberalization have declined , reduced trade intensity might still impede economic development in some countries .
Only a handful of economies over the last 60 years have fully caught up to advanced-economy living standards , and all relied on export-led growth to drive productivity and job creation in manufacturing .
Relying solely on that model will be more difficult in the future .
China is so big that it must develop domestic drivers of growth at an earlier stage of development than did Japan , Taiwan , or South Korea ; as a result , its exports will inevitably decline ( relative to GDP ) .
Meanwhile , for some low-income countries , increased manufacturing and service-sector automation of the sort described by Brynjolfsson and McAfee , whether within advanced economies or within China ’ s established industrial clusters , will make the path to middle- and high-income status more difficult to achieve .
That poses important challenges for development policy , which further trade liberalization can alleviate only marginally .
Facing Reality in the Eurozone
LONDON – European Central Bank President Mario Draghi ’ s recent speech at the annual gathering of central bankers in Jackson Hole , Wyoming , has excited great interest , but the implication of his remarks is even more startling than many initially recognized .
If a eurozone breakup is to be avoided , escaping from continued recession will require increased fiscal deficits financed with ECB money .
The only question is how openly that reality will be admitted .
The latest economic data have forced eurozone policymakers to face the severe deflationary risks that have been apparent for at least two years .
Inflation is stuck far below the ECB ’ s 2 % annual target , and GDP growth has ground to a halt .
Without strong policy action , the eurozone , like Japan since the 1990s , faces a lost decade or two of painfully slow growth .
Until last month , growing concern provoked unconvincing policy proposals .
Jens Weidmann provided the novel spectacle of a Bundesbank president calling for higher wages .
But wage growth will not occur without policy stimulus .
Draghi sought to talk down the euro exchange rate to improve competitiveness .
But Japan and China also want competitive exchange rates to spur export growth , and the eurozone already runs a current-account surplus .
The German model of export-led growth cannot work for the eurozone as a whole .
Structural reform is certainly needed in some countries to increase long-term growth potential ; but the impact of structural reform on short-term growth is often negative .
The eurozone needs higher domestic demand to escape the debt overhang left behind by pre-crisis excess .
In countries such as Spain and Ireland , private debts grew to unsustainable levels .
In others , such as Greece and Italy , public debt also was too high .
Household consumption , business investment , and public expenditure have all been cut in an attempt to pay down debt .
But simultaneous public and private deleveraging is bound to depress demand and growth .
Faced with private deleveraging in the 1990s , Japan avoided an even deeper depression only by running large public deficits .
That is why eurozone fiscal austerity has become self-defeating .
The more aggressively the Italian government , for example , cuts expenditure or increases taxation , the more its public-debt burden – already above 130 % of GDP – will likely grow to unsustainable levels .
Until two weeks ago , eurozone policymakers denied this reality .
On August 22 , at Jackson Hole , Draghi admitted it .
Without higher aggregate demand , he argued , structural reform could be ineffective ; and higher demand requires fiscal stimulus alongside expansionary monetary policy .
The Italian economists Francesco Giavazzi and Guido Tabellini have spelled out what coordinated fiscal and monetary policy could mean .
They propose tax cuts equal to 5 % of GDP for 3-4 years in all eurozone countries , financed by very long-term public debt , all of which the ECB should buy .
They argue that ECB quantitative easing alone , with no fiscal relaxation , would be ineffective .
Giavazzi and Tabellini ’ s proposals may entail too large a stimulus .
But they also highlight a crucial question : How does quantitative easing stimulate an economy ?
The Bank of England has presented QE as a purely monetary policy tool that sustains economic growth in the face of necessary and desirable fiscal consolidation .
It works , the BoE has argued , by reducing medium-term interest rates , increasing asset prices , and inducing shifts in investor preferences that indirectly stimulate investment and thus demand .
The US Federal Reserve ’ s position has been more ambiguous .
Fed Vice-Chairman Stanley Fischer , like former Chairman Ben Bernanke , has stressed that premature fiscal consolidation can hold back post-crisis recovery .
Thus , the Fed has implicitly viewed QE in part as a tool to ensure that rising bond yields do not offset the beneficial impact of large deficits .
The Fed ’ s position is more persuasive .
Fiscal stimulus has a direct and powerful impact on demand .
In Milton Friedman ’ s words , it enters directly into “ the current income stream . ”
Monetary stimulus alone is less direct , takes longer , and risks causing adverse side effects .
Continued low interest rates allow unsuccessful companies to struggle on , slowing productivity growth ; asset-price rises exacerbate inequality ; and monetary stimulus works only by reigniting the private credit growth that generated the debt overhang in the first place .
But if fiscal stimulus must be facilitated by central bank bond purchases to prevent yield increases and to assuage fears about debt sustainability , doesn ’ t that amount to monetary financing of fiscal deficits ?
The answer depends on whether the purchases prove permanent .
In Japan , where the central bank now owns government bonds worth 35 % of GDP ( a level that is rising fast ) , they undoubtedly will .
There is no credible scenario in which Japan can generate fiscal surpluses large enough to repay its accumulated debt : a significant proportion will remain permanently on the Bank of Japan ’ s balance sheet .
Likewise , if Giavazzi and Tabellini ’ s proposal were adopted , the result would almost certainly be some permanent increase in the ECB ’ s balance sheet .
Should we admit that possibility explicitly in advance ?
The argument in favor is that failure to do so would raise fears about how increased public debt would ever be repaid , or about how the ECB would “ exit ” from a swollen balance sheet , in turn undermining the stimulative impact of fiscal and monetary coordination .
The argument against is moral hazard : If we admit that modest ECB-financed deficits are possible and appropriate now , what will prevent politicians and electorates from demanding large and inflationary ECB-financed deficits on other occasions ?
The political risks are certainly great .
Optimal policy may therefore require a non-transparent fudge ; monetary and fiscal “ coordination ” might mean , after the fact , permanent monetary finance , but without ever openly admitting that possibility .
But , fudge or not , Draghi has moved the debate forward dramatically .
Without a greater role for fiscal policy , the eurozone will face either continued slow growth or an eventual breakup .
When Fewer Is Better
LONDON – Is a shrinking population always a bad thing ?
Judging by the lamentations of some economists and policymakers in the advanced economies , where people are living longer and birth rates have fallen below replacement levels , one certainly might think so .
In fact , the benefits of demographic stability – or even slight decline – outweigh any adverse effects .
To be sure , an aging population poses obvious challenges for pension systems .
And , as economists like Paul Krugman have suggested , it could also mean that advanced economies face not only a slow recovery , but also the danger of “ secular stagnation . ”
With slower population growth , the need to invest in capital stock diminishes .
Meanwhile , people planning for longer retirements may save more to ensure adequate pensions .
If these savings exceed investment needs , they could lead to inadequate aggregate demand , depressing economic growth .
But the policy challenges associated with these demographic shifts are manageable .
And , perhaps more important , the benefits of increased longevity and reduced fertility are considerable .
Rising life expectancy is the welcome product of medical and economic progress , and additional increases are almost certain .
Indeed , the average life expectancy for children born in prosperous countries could soon exceed 100 .
That implies an ever-rising ratio of those over 65 to younger cohorts .
But as long as average retirement ages rise to keep stable the proportions of life spent in work and in retirement , the fact that working and retirement years are growing at equal rates has no adverse economic effect .
There is , moreover , strong evidence that rising longevity can mean more years of healthy active life , not unhealthy dependency .
Only bad policies , such as the recent German commitment to reduce retirement ages , can turn longer lives into an economic problem .
Declining fertility , including in some lower- and middle-income countries , such as Iran and Brazil , also reflects hugely positive social developments – particularly the empowerment of women .
Wherever women have the right to an education and to choose how many children to have , fertility rates fall to or slightly below replacement levels .
Falling birth rates challenge pension systems more than rising longevity , because they imply a rising old-age dependency ratio even if retirement ages increase in line with life expectancy .
But as long as birth rates are only slightly below replacement level , pension systems ’ sustainability can be ensured by means of affordable increases in contribution rates .
And lower birth rates deliver the offsetting benefit of lower child dependency ratios , reducing education costs or enabling increased investment in education per child .
Slower population growth might also reduce the increase in wealth-to-income ratios , and the resulting increase in inequality that Thomas Piketty recently highlighted .
In many countries , the increase results primarily from the rise in real-estate prices relative to income , as more prosperous people devote a growing share of their income to purchasing property in desirable locations .
Continued population growth would intensify competition for such “ positional goods , ” which are not easily supplied in greater volume .
A stable population , or actual decline , would reduce their importance somewhat .
It would also make it easier to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions at an acceptable cost , and to preserve and enhance local environmental quality , which people increasingly value as their incomes rise .
For today ’ s advanced economies , a stable or slightly declining population would likely be optimal for human welfare .
For the world as a whole , it is a desirable goal .
But it is also a distant goal .
Indeed , population decline in the advanced countries remains far less of a problem than rapid population growth in many developing countries .
The United Nations ’ medium fertility scenario projects that the world ’ s population will rise from seven billion today to ten billion by 2050 .
Nigeria ’ s population could rise from 123 million in 2000 to 440 million by 2050 , while Yemen ’ s could grow from 18 million to 42 million .
High fertility rates in many countries are partly a consequence of low income .
But causation also runs the other way .
High fertility rates stymie prospects for economic growth , because excessively rapid population growth makes it impossible to accumulate per capita stocks of physical and human capital at the pace required to drive rapid income gains .
That said , efforts to control population growth through measures like China ’ s compulsory one-child policy are both morally abhorrent and unnecessary .
As examples like Iran show , even low-income countries can achieve dramatic fertility reductions simply by providing choice and education .
But that does not change the fact that China ’ s rapid fertility decline played a major role in its extraordinary economic breakthrough .
Facile commentary often suggests the opposite : countries with high fertility rates supposedly enjoy the demographic dividend of a rapidly rising and youthful population .
But , beyond some rate of population growth , jobs cannot be created fast enough to absorb the growing workforce .
Almost all countries with fertility rates well above replacement levels face economically and socially harmful youth-unemployment rates .
Political instability in the Middle East has many causes , but among them is the lack of jobs for young people , especially young men .
Yes , demographic slowdown may , as Krugman and others have argued , increase the risk of deficient demand and below-potential growth .
But if the problem is inadequate demand , the danger can be averted .
Governments and central banks can always create additional nominal demand if they are willing to use all of the policy tools available to them , such as debt- or money-financed public investment .
And if there are underused resources , additional real growth will result .
If aging populations lead to secular stagnation , the cause will be deficient policies .
By contrast , the problems created by excessively rapid population growth are rooted in real and unavoidable constraints .
The manageable challenges created by rising life expectancy and lower birth rates should not be allowed to obscure the huge benefits of greater longevity and population stabilization .
And it certainly should not blind us to the adverse economic and social consequences of rapid population growth .
Rethinking the Monetization Taboo
LONDON – Now that the pace of the US Federal Reserve ’ s “ tapering ” of its asset-purchase program has been debated to death , attention will increasingly turn to prospects for interest-rate increases .
But another question looms : How will central banks achieve a final “ exit ” from unconventional monetary policy and return balance sheets swollen by unconventional monetary policy to “ normal ” levels ?
To many , a larger issue needs to be addressed .
The Fed ’ s tapering merely slows the growth of its balance sheet .
The authorities would still have to sell $ 3 trillion of bonds to return to the pre-crisis status quo .
The rarely admitted truth , however , is that there is no need for central banks ’ balance sheets to shrink .
They could stay permanently larger ; and , for some countries , permanently bigger central-bank balance sheets will help reduce public-debt burdens .
As a recent IMF paper by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff illustrates , advanced economies face debt burdens that cannot be reduced simply through a mix of austerity , forbearance , and growth .
But if a central bank owns the debt of its own government , no net public liability exists .
The government owns the central bank , so the debt is to itself , and the interest expense comes back to the government as the central bank ’ s profit .
If central bank holdings of government debt were converted into non-interest-bearing perpetual obligations , nothing substantive would change , but it would become obvious that some previously issued public debt did not need to be repaid .
This amounts to “ helicopter money ” after the fact .
In 2003 , then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke argued that Japan , facing deflation , should increase public expenditure or cut taxes , funding the operation by printing money rather than issuing bonds .
This , he argued , was bound to increase national income , because the direct stimulative effect would not be offset by concern about future debt burdens .
His advice was not followed ; large Japanese deficits were in fact bond-financed .
But the debts held by the Bank of Japan ( BoJ ) could still be written off .
In Japan ’ s case , this would reduce government debt by an amount equal to more than 40 % of GDP today , and around 60 % if implemented after the bond purchases planned for 2014 .
Objections focus on two risks : central-bank losses and excessive inflation .
But both of these outcomes can be avoided .
Central banks have bought government bonds with money on which they currently pay zero or very low interest rates .
So , as interest rates rise , central banks might face costs exceeding their income .
But central banks can choose to pay zero interest on a portion of the reserves that commercial banks hold with them , even when they increase the policy interest rate .
And they can require commercial banks to hold zero-interest reserves at the central bank equal to a defined proportion of their loans , thus preventing inflationary growth of private credit and money .
Permanent monetization of government debts is undoubtedly technically possible .
Whether it is desirable depends on the outlook for inflation .
Where inflation is returning to target levels , debt monetization could be unnecessarily and dangerously stimulative .
Central-bank bond sales , while certainly not inevitable , may be appropriate .
But if deflation is the danger , permanent monetization may be the best policy .
I predict that Japan will , in effect , permanently monetize some government debt .
After two decades of low growth and deflation , Japanese gross public debt is now above 240 % of GDP ( and above 140 % of GDP on a net basis ) ; and , with the fiscal deficit at 9.5 % of GDP , the debt burden continues to increase .
According to the IMF , to reduce its net public debt to 80 % of GDP by 2030 , Japan would have to turn today ’ s 8.6 % primary budget deficit ( the balance excluding interest payments ) into a 6.7 % primary surplus by 2020 and maintain such surpluses continuously until 2030 .
That will not happen , and any attempt to reach that target would drive Japan into a severe depression .
But the government does not need to repay the ¥ 140 trillion ( $ 1.4 trillion ) of its debt that the BoJ already owns .
The BoJ will continue to increase its balance sheet until it achieves its 2 % inflation target .
Thereafter , its balance sheet may stabilize in absolute yen terms and fall slowly as a percentage of GDP , but its absolute size will probably never decrease – a likelihood that should cause no concern .
It is precisely what happened to the Fed ’ s balance sheet after its wartime and postwar buying of US government bonds came to an end in 1951 .
Even as permanent monetization occurs , however , the truth may be obfuscated .
If government bond repayments to the BoJ continued , but were always offset by new BoJ bond purchases , and if the BoJ kept the interest rate on reserves at zero , the net effect would be the same as a debt write-off , but the fiction of “ normal ” central-bank operations could be maintained .
Central banks can monetize debt while pretending not to .
That pretense may reflect a useful taboo : if we overtly recognize that debt write-off / monetization is possible , politicians might want to do it all the time and in excess , not just in circumstances that make it appropriate .
The historical experience of Weimar Germany , or that of Zimbabwe today , illustrates the danger .
As a result , even when permanent monetization occurs – as it almost certainly will in Japan and possibly elsewhere – it may remain forever the policy that dare not speak its name .
Such reticence may serve a useful purpose .
But it must not blind central banks and governments to the full range of policy tools available to address today ’ s severe debt overhangs .
The Perils of Financial Freedom
LONDON – Back in 2007 , China ’ s then-prime minister , Wen Jiabao , famously described his country ’ s economy as “ unstable , unbalanced , uncoordinated , and unsustainable . ”
Today , the imbalance remains , with the economy too focused on investment and too dependent on credit .
China ’ s current leadership is committed to building a more balanced model , and believes that the market must play a “ decisive role ” in achieving that .
But , while stronger market discipline is needed in some areas , Chinese officials should be under no illusion that free markets are a panacea for the financial sector .
Indeed , China ’ s current economic imbalances partly reflect the dangers created by competition in credit markets .
Even before the 2008 global financial crisis , China ’ s annual investment / GDP ratio was running at an exceptionally high 40 % , and economists were calling for a transition to more consumption-led growth .
But the huge credit stimulus introduced in 2009 drove the economy further in the opposite direction .
The investment ratio rose to 47 % by 2012 , and construction now accounts for 30 % of all output .
Total credit has risen from 130 % of GDP to 200 % , with both bank loans and “ shadow bank ” credit expanding rapidly .
Both China and the global economy benefited from that stimulus , which helped prop up overall demand in dangerously deflationary times .
But it has led to significant wasted investment in heavy industry , real estate , and urban infrastructure , and leaves China facing the challenge of deleveraging and working out bad debts .
In many areas , improved market discipline does have an important role to play in addressing the structural causes of imbalance .
Wasteful construction investment is encouraged by the under-pricing of rural land .
The lack of a normal ownership relationship between the central government and state-owned enterprises ( SOEs ) allows the latter to pay minimal dividends and over-invest in business expansion .
Caps on interest rates on bank deposits result in household savers supplying a large subsidy to corporate borrowers .
And SOEs have better access to credit from state-owned banks than private companies do .
But the belief that financial liberalization will provide an easy route to a balanced and stable economy is a delusion , as Japan ’ s experience in the 1980 ’ s illustrates .
As Joe Studwell argues persuasively in his book How Asia Works , neither Japan nor South Korea based its successful economic development on free markets in credit supply ; instead , they relied on the deliberate direction of credit toward industrial development rather than real estate or consumption .
When Japan relaxed constraints on its banking system in the 1980 ’ s , the result was an enormous real-estate boom and subsequent bust , followed by two decades of slow growth and deflation .
China ’ s per capita income is still only about a quarter of Japan ’ s in 1990 ; it would be a tragedy if it suffered a similar setback before completing the path to developed-country living standards .
One striking feature of the Chinese economy , however , is that real estate and urban infrastructure development – high-rise housing , grand transport projects , convention centers , sports stadiums , and museums – already play a far more important role than they did in Japan and South Korea at comparable stages of economic development .
This reflects the interaction of two distinctively Chinese factors and one inherent feature of all banking systems .
The first Chinese factor is the authorities ’ focus on “ urbanization ” as an end in itself , rather than as a byproduct of industrialization .
The second is China ’ s decentralized approach to economic development , with strong competition between regions and cities often focusing on prestige urban infrastructure projects .
The universal feature in this mix is the fact that banks everywhere can create private credit , money , and purchasing power that did not previously exist , and they have a natural bias , if not constrained by public policy , to allocate it to fund real-estate developments , which drive rising land prices .
These factors will drive construction booms and busts even if obvious market distortions are removed and market discipline is tightened .
The pre-crisis Irish and Spanish banking systems proved just as capable as Chinese state-owned banks at funding excessive real-estate construction .
So , even as China introduces greater market discipline to a largely positive effect , it must plan to constrain credit creation with policy tools that were missing in the advanced economies before the 2008 crisis .
Caps on loan-to-value or loan-to-income ratios on real-estate loans should be used aggressively .
Capital requirements for banks should reflect higher risk weights for real-estate lending than banks ’ private assessments of credit risks suggest are appropriate .
The People ’ s Bank of China should maintain reserve requirements for commercial banks to contain credit creation , rather than reject them as old-fashioned , as occurred in the advanced economies in the decades before 2008 .
Credit provision by shadow banks needs to be tightly regulated .
The credit cycle is too important to be left to free markets .
China thus faces a difficult challenge .
It must undergo a transition not to the Western model that produced the 2008 crisis , but to an entirely new model that combines elements of market discipline with strong public-policy constraints .
How smoothly that transition occurs matters for the whole world .
By the early 2020 ’ s , China ’ s GDP will be $ 20 trillion .
If the credit / GDP ratio reaches 250 % by then , total loans and debt securities would equal $ 50 trillion , which is more than three times the total of US mortgage debt in 2008 .
Today , much of that debt represents claims within the state sector – owed , for instance , by SOEs to state-owned banks .
But , as the private sector develops , SOEs are subjected to hard budget constraints , and the external capital account is opened , this huge credit mountain will create increasing global financial vulnerability .
One hopes that the Chinese authorities understand the dangers as well as the benefits of free financial markets better than advanced-economy policymakers did ahead of the 2008 crisis .
If not , another crisis – far more severe than the last – may become inevitable .
The Great Credit Mistake
LONDON – Before the financial crisis erupted in 2008 , private credit in most developed economies grew faster than GDP .
Then credit growth collapsed .
Whether that fall reflected low demand for credit or constrained supply may seem like a technical issue .
But the answer holds important implications for policymaking and prospects for economic growth .
And the official answer is probably wrong .
The prevailing view has usually stressed supply constraints and the policies needed to fix them .
An impaired banking system , it is argued , starves businesses , particularly small and medium-size enterprises ( SMEs ) , of the funds they need to expand .
In September 2008 , US President George W. Bush wanted to “ free up banks to resume the flow of credit to American families and businesses . ”
The stress tests and recapitalizations of US banks in 2009 were subsequently hailed as crucial to the recovery of both the banking system and the economy .
By contrast , the European Central Bank ’ s inadequately tough stress tests in 2010 were widely panned for leaving eurozone banks too weak to provide adequate credit .
In the United Kingdom , banks have been criticized for not lending the reserves created by quantitative easing to the real economy , leading the Bank of England to introduce its “ funding for lending ” scheme in 2012 .
In the eurozone , it is hoped that this year ’ s asset quality review ( AQR ) and stress tests will finally dispel concerns about bank solvency and free up credit supply .
A “ credit crunch ” – particularly in trade finance – was certainly a key reason why the financial crisis generated a real economy recession .
Taxpayer-funded bank rescues , higher bank capital requirements , and ultra-easy monetary policy have all been vital to overcome credit supply constraints .
But there is strong evidence that once the immediate crisis was over , lack of demand for credit played a far larger role than restricted supply in impeding economic growth .
That argument is persuasively made by Atif Mian and Amir Sufi in House of Debt , an important new book that analyzes US data on a county-by-county basis .
Mian and Sufi show that the recession was caused by a collapse of household consumption , and that consumption fell most in those counties where pre-crisis borrowing and post-crisis real-estate prices left households facing the largest relative losses in net wealth .
It was in those US counties , too , that local businesses cut employment most aggressively .
For SMEs , a shortage of customers , not a shortage of credit , constrained borrowing , employment , and output .
And the customers were absent because the pre-crisis credit boom had left them over-leveraged .
In the UK , many business surveys from 2009-2012 told the same story .
Poor customer demand was ranked well ahead of credit availability as a constraint on growth .
Economic growth can indeed continue to be severely depressed by a debt overhang even when credit supply is unrestricted and cheap .
Many Japanese companies were left overleveraged by the boom and bust in credit and real estate in the 1980s and early 1990s .
By the late 1990s , the Japanese banking system was offering companies loans at near-zero interest rates .
But , rather than borrow to invest , firms cut investment to pay down debt , driving two decades of stagnation and deflation .
Since 2011 , the ECB ’ s analysis of weak eurozone growth has stressed the negative impact of an impaired and fragmented financial system , with high sovereign-bond yields and funding costs for banks resulting in prohibitive lending terms in the peripheral countries .
Major progress in fixing these problems has already been achieved .
The ECB ’ s latest Monthly Bulletin documents this , citing multiple indicators of improved credit availability and pricing .
Nonetheless , the rate of decline in private-sector loans has accelerated over the last year – from -0.6 % to -2 % – and low demand is acknowledged to be the main driver of depressed credit growth .
Simultaneous private deleveraging and fiscal consolidation are restricting eurozone growth far more than remaining restrictions on credit supply .
Despite the ECB ’ s own evidence , however , the policy focus remains on fixing the credit-supply problem , through the AQR and stress tests , and through the ECB ’ s own version of a funding for lending scheme , announced on June 5 .
That reflects a recurring tendency in official policy debates , particularly in the eurozone , to concentrate on fixable problems to the exclusion of more difficult issues .
Fixing impaired banking systems after a crisis is both essential and achievable .
Moreover , even when public rescue costs are inevitable , they are typically small change compared to the economic harm wrought by the financial crisis and post-crisis recession .
By contrast , a large debt overhang may be intractable unless policy orthodoxies are challenged .
Japan offset private deleveraging in the 1990s by running massive public deficits .
The US has pulled out of recession faster than the eurozone , not only – or even primarily – because it fixed its banking system faster , but because it pursued more stimulative fiscal policies .
But fiscal stimulus is constrained within the eurozone , where member countries no longer issue their own currency and “ sovereign ” debt therefore carries a default risk .
Aggressive monetary expansion through quantitative easing is also far more complicated and politically contentious in a currency area with no federal debt for the central bank to buy .
To survive and thrive , the eurozone will need to become more centralized , with some common fiscal revenues , expenditures , and debts .
Of course , this scenario implies immensely difficult political choices .
But the starting point for debate must be realism about the nature and severity of the problems facing the eurozone .
If eurozone policy assumes that fixing the banks will fix the economy , the next ten years in Europe could look like the 1990s in Japan .
Inequality by the Click
LONDON – Pope Francis warned in November that “ ideologies which defend the absolute autonomy of the marketplace ” are driving rapid growth in inequality .
Is he right ?
In one sense , Francis was clearly wrong : in many cases , inequality between countries is decreasing .
The average Chinese household , for example , is now catching up with the average American household ( though still with a long way to go ) .
But such examples do not negate the importance of rising inequality within countries .
Both China and the United States are dramatically unequal societies – and are becoming more so .
In the US , the statistics are striking at both ends of the income distribution .
The bottom quarter of US households have received almost no increase in real ( inflation-adjusted ) income for the last 25 years .
They are no longer sharing the fruits of their country ’ s growth .
The top 1 % of Americans , however , have seen their real incomes almost triple during this period , with their share of national income reaching 20 % , a figure not seen since the 1920 ’ s .
In many emerging countries , rapid economic growth has raised living standards to at least some degree for almost everyone , but the share of the rich and ultra-rich is increasing dramatically .
Once these countries approach the average income levels of developed economies , and their growth slows to typical rich-country rates , their future may look like America today .
Globalization explains some of the bottom-quarter income stagnation in the US and other developed economies .
Competition from lower-paid Chinese workers has driven down US wages .
But technological change may be a more fundamental factor – and one with consequences for all countries .
Technological change is the essence of economic growth .
We get richer because we figure out how to maintain or increase output with fewer employees , and because innovation creates new products and services .
Successful new technologies always cause job losses in some sectors , which are offset by new jobs elsewhere .
Tractors destroyed millions of agricultural jobs , for example , but tractor , truck , and car manufacturers created millions of new ones .
But new technologies come in subtly different forms , with inherently different economic consequences .
Today ’ s new technologies may have far more troubling distributional effects than those of the electromechanical age .
Imagine that 30 years ago , someone had discovered a set of magic words enabling us to speak to any friend anywhere in the world – “ abracadabra John ” and you were talking to John , wherever he was .
Provided she secured intellectual-property rights , the inventor would have become the richest person in the world ; and her lawyers and those who provided her with luxury goods and services would have become pretty rich , too .
But , beyond that , no new jobs would have been created .
Information and communication technology is not costless magic ; but it is closer to it than were the innovations of the electromechanical age .
The cost of computing hardware collapses over time in line with Moore ’ s law of relentlessly increasing processing power .
And once software has been developed , the marginal cost of copying it is effectively zero .
The consumer benefits of this technology are large relative to its price : the cost of each year ’ s latest computer , tablet , or smartphone is trivial compared to the cost of a new car in 1950 .
But the number of jobs created is trivial , too .
In 1979 , General Motors employed 850,000 workers .
Today , Microsoft employs only 100,000 people worldwide , Google employs 50,000 , and Facebook employs just 5,000 .
These are mere drops in the ocean of the global labor market , replacing very few of the jobs that information technology has automated away .
But increased unemployment is not inevitable .
There is no limit to the number of service jobs that we can create in retail , restaurants and catering , hotels , and an enormous variety of personal services .
Walmart , for example , employs two million people , and the US Bureau of Labor Statistics forecasts that more than one million additional jobs will be created in America ’ s leisure and hospitality sector in the next decade .
But the wages that the market will set for these jobs may result in yet greater inequality .
And there is no reason to believe that politicians ’ all-purpose answer to the problem – “ increase workforce skills ” – will offset this tendency .
However many people learn superior IT skills , Facebook will never need more than a few thousand employees .
And access to high-paid jobs is likely to be determined not by absolute skill level , but by relative skill in a winner-take-all world .
At least , however , IT products and services are very cheap , so even the relatively poor can afford them .
That might make very unequal societies more stable than many fear .
In his recent book Average is Over , the economist Tyler Cowen makes the deliberately provocative argument that while new technology will produce extreme inequality , the relative losers , satiated by computer games and Internet entertainment , and provided with the basics of a minimally acceptable life , will be too docile to revolt .
Cowen may be right ; the poor may not rebel .
But extreme inequality should still concern us .
Beyond a certain point , unequal outcomes inevitably fuel greater inequality of opportunity ; and extreme inequality of either outcomes or opportunity can undermine the idea that we should all be equal as citizens , if not in material standard of living .
So Pope Francis was right : despite capitalism ’ s undoubted success as a system for generating economic growth , we cannot rely on market forces alone to generate desirable social outcomes .
All new technologies create opportunities , but free markets will distribute the fruits of some new technologies in dramatically unequal ways .
Offsetting such outcomes will be a greater challenge today than it has been in the past .
Protectionist Shadows over Solar Power
CAMBRIDGE – As July ended , a settlement was reached in the world ’ s largest anti-dumping dispute , with China agreeing to a minimum price for the solar panels that it exports to the European Union .
The solution is much less severe than what had been the imminent alternative : EU tariffs on Chinese solar panels were set to rise to 47.6 % , as a result of the European Commission ’ s “ finding ” that China – whose market share now stands at 80 % in Europe – had been “ dumping . ”
Nonetheless , the settlement is a bad outcome for consumers – and for the environment .
The China-EU dispute parallels a similar one between China and the United States .
Last fall , the US introduced tariffs of 24-36 % against Chinese solar-panel imports , after the Commerce Department determined that China had been “ dumping ” – which is generally defined as selling at a price below cost – into the American market .
China , citing its own finding of US dumping of polysilicon – a key input in the production of solar panels – into its market , has already retaliated by imposing import tariffs that could exceed 50 % .
The solar-panel disputes may sound narrow and esoteric , but they go to the heart of the long-running debate over globalization .
Anti-globalization activists ’ most powerful argument is that even if free trade is good for economic progress overall , it might undermine important public goods such as environmental protection .
Under the well-known “ race to the bottom ” hypothesis , countries that are open to international trade are thought to adopt weaker environmental regulations than less open countries do .
But trade can also have beneficial environmental effects .
Specialization in each country allows people to obtain more of what they want , which , especially at higher income levels , includes cleaner air and water .
When trade brings down costs , it can benefit environmental goods just as much as it benefits other goods .
So , is trade globalization , on balance , better or worse for the environment ?
Some empirical studies of cross-country data find net beneficial effects on indicators of environmental degradation like local sulfur-dioxide air pollution .
Provided that countries have effective governance institutions at the national level , trade and growth give them the means to clean their air .
But the evidence also suggests that trade and growth can exacerbate other forms of environmental degradation , particularly carbon-dioxide emissions , because CO2 is a global externality that cannot be addressed at the national level , owing to the free-rider problem .
The solar-power industry is a perfect example of how trade can benefit air quality .
Skeptics of solar power have long argued that its share in electricity generation cannot rise above a few percentage points without massive subsidies , because it is too costly compared to the alternatives .
Proponents , for their part , counter that temporary moderate subsidies would expand the industry , with economies of scale and learning-by-doing then bringing down costs sharply .
But proponents have focused too much on government subsidies and too little on the contribution of international trade , which in recent years has had a highly positive effect on the development of solar power , as the bonanza of Chinese panels held down costs .
The current embrace of protectionism threatens to reverse this progress .
With the loss of cheap solar panels from China , and with subsidies that helped to drive the European industry now reduced for fiscal reasons , the share of solar power in Europe will fall far short of environmentalists ’ goals .
But “ findings ” of “ dumping ” into foreign markets surely warrant some response , no ?
Actually , no .
For starters , even those who are generally sympathetic to trade and markets often have the impression that anti-dumping laws target “ predatory pricing , ” a practice in which a large producer sells below cost in order to drive its competitors into bankruptcy , at which point it can raise the price and reap monopoly profits .
But that is not even the way anti-dumping laws are usually written , let alone applied .
Simply put , anti-dumping measures , such as the US and EU tariffs against Chinese solar panels , are a means of reducing , not fostering , competition .
So , if predatory pricing is not the producers ’ motive for selling below cost in these cases , what is ?
The solar-panel industry worldwide – in China , Europe , and the US – is experiencing a glut of productive capacity .
As a result , global supply and demand are balanced at a market price that is below the long-term average cost per unit , which includes a share of the cost already incurred in building the factories .
But that market price is not below the short-term cost of keeping the factories running once they are built .
In other words , producers sell at prices that are “ below cost , ” because , having already built the factories , they would lose even more money if they charged above the competitive market price or shut down production altogether .
When the US or EU finds that China is “ dumping ” solar panels , or when China finds that the US is “ dumping ” polysilicon , they are using average cost rather than marginal cost .
By this criterion , dumping occurs every time a store has a clearance sale .
Some have compared the negotiated agreements to limit China ’ s solar-panel exports to past “ voluntary export restraints ” ( VERs ) or “ orderly marketing arrangements ” in the steel and consumer-electronic industries , especially those that Japan agreed to apply to its exports to the US in the 1980 ’ s .
But a more revealing precedent is Japan ’ s VERs on exports of autos during this period .
American automakers had found it increasingly difficult to compete against smaller , more fuel-efficient Japanese imports .
When free trade was eventually restored , American wallets and air quality benefited ( and the US auto industry was forced to become more efficient ) .
Free trade in automobiles was good for the environment 30 years ago .
The same is true of trade in solar equipment today .
Westerners should thank Chinese panel producers for their contribution to keeping solar power viable , not penalize them through protectionist anti-dumping measures .
The Russian Godfather
WARSAW – Russian President Vladimir Putin is behaving like a Mafia boss .
In invading , occupying , and finally annexing Crimea , he pointed Russia ’ s guns at Ukraine and said : your territorial sovereignty or your life .
So far , extortion has worked – and Putin knows it .
Indeed , in his speech announcing the annexation of Crimea , Putin spoke his mind : his regime fears no punishment and will do whatever it pleases .
Crimea is just the first step toward realizing his dream of revived Russian greatness .
His address in the Kremlin was a tissue of lies and manipulation , though a subtle analysis would be a waste of time .
The simple fact is that the president of one of the world ’ s most powerful countries has embarked on a path of confrontation with the entire international community .
His speech smacked of the fevered , paranoid world of Fyodor Dostoyevsky ’ s Demons , conjuring as it did a delusional alternative universe – a place that does not exist and has never existed .
What does Kosovo , where the Albanians suffered persecution and ethnic cleansing , have in common with the situation in Crimea , whose people have never been oppressed by Ukrainians ?
What is the point in displaying open contempt for Ukraine ’ s government , parliament , and people ?
Why label Ukrainian authorities “ fascist and anti-Semitic ” ?
Crimean Tatars pay no heed to the fairy tales about fascists ruling Ukraine ; they can still remember the brutal and murderous mass deportations of their parents and grandparents , ordered by Stalin and carried out by the NKVD .
In Putin ’ s mind , the whole world has discriminated against Russia for the last three centuries .
Russia ’ s bloody despots – Catherine II , Nicholas I , or Stalin – apparently never discriminated against anyone .
Putin also warns that “ you and we – the Russians and the Ukrainians – could lose Crimea completely . ”
Yet he fails to specify who – perhaps Poles and Lithuanians again ? – are setting their sights on Sevastopol .
Russia could not , according to Putin , leave the people of Crimea “ alone in their predicament . ”
These words prompt a sad smile ; Leonid Brezhnev used precisely the same phrase in August 1968 to justify the Red Army ’ s intervention in Czechoslovakia to help beleaguered Communist hardliners there crush the Prague Spring reform movement .
“ We want Ukraine to be a strong , sovereign , and independent country , ” says Putin .
Stalin said the same thing about Poland in 1945 .
Brave Russian democrats who have not yet been silenced have already remarked on the similarity between Putin ’ s appeal to ethnic solidarity in annexing Crimea and Hitler ’ s stance during the Anschluss and the Sudeten crisis in 1938 .
This is the real end of history – the history of dreams about a world governed by democratic values and the market economy .
Unless the democratic world understands that now is not the time for faith in diplomatic compromise , and that it must respond strongly enough to stop Putin ’ s imperial designs , events could follow a logic that is too dreadful to contemplate .
It takes force to stop a thug , not sharp words or cosmetic sanctions .
I commend and take pride in Poland ’ s prudent and determined policy and the attitude of its public , which do us great credit .
But we must recognize that the best quarter-century in the last 400 years of Polish history is about to end before our very eyes .
A time of tectonic shifts has begun .
We must appreciate what we have managed to achieve – and learn to protect it .
Mafia bosses often meet an unhappy fate , and I do not think that Putin will fare much better in the end .
Unfortunately , many people are likely to be hurt in the meantime , not least those who now support him .
Living with Climate Change
ROTTERDAM – For anyone still undecided about the consequences of global warming , the summer of 2018 , one of the hottest on record , should have tipped the scales .
Across far-flung longitudes and latitudes , regions are struggling with the fallout from large-scale climate-related events .
In the southern United States , cities and towns pummeled by Hurricane Florence in September were still drying out when Hurricane Michael brought more flooding in October .
In California , firefighters are battling the embers of the largest wildfire in state history .
And in parts of Latin America , Europe , Africa , and Asia , agricultural output is in freefall following months of stifling heat .
Cooler weather has done little to ease the suffering .
According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , “ moderate ” to “ exceptional ” drought conditions cover 25.1 % of the United States .
But “ extreme ” and “ exceptional ” drought – the worst categories – expanded to cover 6.3 % of the country , up from 6 % in mid-September .
Regions in Australia also are struggling with the worst drought in a generation .
In fact , for a growing number of people around the world , floods , landslides , and heatwaves – Japan ’ s summer in a nutshell – is the new normal .
A recent study in the journal PLOS Medicine projects a fivefold increase in heat-related deaths in the US by 2080 ; the outlook for poorer countries is even worse .
The climate debate is no longer about causes ; fossil fuels and human activity are the culprits .
Rather , the question is how billions of at-risk people and businesses can rapidly adapt and ensure their communities are as resilient as possible .
Even if the world meets the Paris climate agreement ’ s target of limiting the increase in global temperature to 2º Celsius relative to pre-industrial levels , adaptation will still be critical , because climate extremes are now the new normal .
Some communities have already recognized this , and local adaptation is well under way .
In Melbourne , Australia , for example , planners are working to double the city ’ s tree canopy by 2040 , an approach that will lower temperatures and reduce heat-related deaths .
Similarly , in Ahmedabad , a city of over seven million people in Western India , authorities have launched a major initiative to cover roofs in reflective paint to lower temperatures on “ heat islands , ” urban areas that trap the sun ’ s warmth and make city living unbearable , even at night .
These are just two of the many infrastructural responses that communities around the world have undertaken .
But adapting to climate change will also mean managing the long-term economic fallout of extreme weather , and this is a requirement that countries are only beginning to take seriously .
Consider water scarcity .
According to a 2016 World Bank analysis , drought-related water crises in Africa and the Middle East could reduce GDP in these regions by as much as 6 % by 2050 .
That would be painful anywhere , but it would be devastating in regions already rife with political turmoil and humanitarian crises .
At the same time , rising sea levels will cause severe damage to coastal areas .
The decline in property values will have far-reaching implications not only for individual wealth , but also for the tax bases of communities and the industries that serve them .
A related concern is that homes and businesses around the world will eventually become under-insured or even uninsurable , owing to the frequency of weather-related catastrophes .
ClimateWise , a global network of insurance industry organizations , has already warned that the world is facing a $ 100 billion annual climate risk “ protection gap ” .
No single international organization or authority has all the answers to the cascade of challenges that climate change has triggered .
But some are taking key leadership roles and pushing governments and local communities to act with more urgency .
One of the more promising initiatives to accelerate solutions , launched just this week , is the Global Commission on Adaptation , chaired by former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates , and World Bank CEO Kristalina Georgieva .
Over the next 15 years , the world will need to invest some $ 90 trillion in infrastructure improvements .
How these projects proceed , and whether they are designed with low-carbon features , could lead the world toward a more-climate resilient future – or they could undermine food , water , and security for decades to come .
Adapting to Climate Change
COPENHAGEN – Striking the right balance between preventing global warming and adapting to its effects is one of the most important – and most vexing – policy questions of our age .
It is also often ignored .
According to the conventional wisdom of many environmental campaigners , we should first do everything we can to mitigate global warming , and only then focus on adaptation strategies .
This seems wrong – even immoral – if we could do more for people and the planet through adaptation .
Moreover , it is inconsistent with the inescapable fact that , whatever we do , we cannot prevent all of global warming ’ s effects .
If we are ill-prepared , global warming will cause more deaths and devastation , especially in poor countries and fragile societies .
Adaptation would also mean saving many lives from catastrophes not related to global warming .
If we prepare societies for more ferocious hurricanes in the future , for example , we are also helping them to cope better with today ’ s extreme weather .
There has been a huge amount of research into the ways that humans cause climate change , and how we can reduce it .
Much less work has been devoted to adaptation .
It is important to acknowledge that some adaptation strategies will lead to more greenhouse-gas emissions .
Responding to water scarcity by re-using and treating wastewater , or through deep-well pumping and desalination , will increase fossil-fuel use .
Using more air-conditioning to cool our houses in summer will do the same – although this is vital if we want to save lives .
Adaptation could allow for higher carbon emissions in another way : reducing the damage and harm that we experience from global warming , giving us more time to implement alternatives to reliance on fossil fuels .
Should any of this stop us from using adaptation strategies ?
To arrive at an informed answer , we need to work out how the planet will look in 2100 if we invest different amounts in adaptation and carbon cuts .
We need to take into account the increase in emissions that adaptation will cause .
The most critical issue isn ’ t any rise or fall in emissions .
It is how much climate damage we can avoid .
How much of the planet can we help by dealing with rising sea levels ?
How many lives can we spare from heat , starvation , or malaria ?
These are the real reasons we care about global warming .
Reaching a proper answer to these questions requires extensive economic modeling , with different variables calculated and regional differences analyzed .
New research by three Italian economists , Francesco Bosello , Carlo Carraro , and Enrica De Cian does this , and , ultimately , provides a powerful economic case for a much greater focus on adaptation .
They first look at the different ways that climate change will affect us at mid-century .
This work is based on standard scenarios , and carries the typical caveats of predictions far into the future .
Nevertheless , they find that many of our biggest concerns will turn out to be trivial , or even beneficial .
Sea-level rises will be a very minor concern for every country , with the financial impact adding up to less than 0.1 % of GDP .
Health problems will be negligible for all but a few nations .
And global warming ’ s impact would reduce energy consumption for almost all nations .
The important effects are on agriculture and tourism , where nations will lose , on average , about 0.5 % of GDP from each sector .
But much of this damage will be avoided by people choosing for themselves to adapt to a change in their environment .
Farmers will choose plants that thrive in heat .
New houses will be designed to deal with warmer temperatures .
Simple economic models , often quoted in the media , show that unconstrained global warming would cost a substantial 2 % of GDP in the rich world by the end of the century .
But this fails to acknowledge that people will change their behavior when the environment changes .
Taking adaptation into account , rich countries will adapt to the negative consequences of global warming and exploit the positive changes , creating a total positive effect of global warming worth about 0.1 % of GDP .
Poor countries will be hit harder , however .
Adaptation will reduce the climate change-related losses from 5 % of GDP to slightly less than 3 % – but this is still a significant impact .
The real challenge of global warming , therefore , lies in tackling its impact on the Third World .
Here , more needs to be done , above and beyond the adaptation that will happen naturally .
Importantly , the new research shows that adaptation would achieve a lot more than cuts in carbon emissions .
Reducing emissions to a level that does not extinguish economic growth could avert $ 3 trillion worth of damage , whereas adaptation could prevent around $ 8 trillion worth of damage .
For every dollar spent on adaptation , we would achieve about $ 1.70 worth of positive changes for the planet .
The economic case for focusing more on adaptation is clear .
The crucial next step is to ensure that economic arguments become a stronger part of our political debate about how to address global warming .
Adapt or Die
MILAN – In rapidly growing emerging markets , a combination of internal economic forces , supportive policies , and the shifting nature of the global economy drive high-speed and far-reaching change .
The transformation of economic structures occurs so quickly that it is virtually impossible not to notice – though the complexity of the change is , at times , bewildering .
In this fluid environment , mistakes are frequently made .
Arguably the most damaging is to stick to a successful growth strategy ( a combination of comparative advantage and supportive policies ) for too long .
In the economy ’ s tradable sector , comparative advantage always shifts , causing structural change and creative destruction .
Countries undergoing a “ middle-income transition ” out of poor-country status frequently try to resist these changes , but doing so causes growth to slow , if not stop altogether .
While the private sector ( domestic and external ) drives these shifts , government policies and public-sector investment patterns play an essential supporting and complementary role .
These need to adapt , too .
The policy framework that has proven to serve the major emerging economies best is one that focuses not only on macro and monetary stability , but also on adaptation , guided by a forward-looking ( though inherently imperfect ) assessment of coming micro and macro structural shifts and the measures needed to support them .
What of the large advanced countries ?
For historical reasons , the policy mindset is less flexible and adaptive .
Structural change is viewed largely as the province of the private sector , and hence not as a key part of long-term policy thinking .
In the postwar period , until recently , advanced economies dominated the global economy .
Emerging economies ’ impact on them was relatively small , and they have yet to respond adequately to the rapid structural changes in the global economy .
A small example : as recently as July 8 , after the latest disappointing employment report in the United States , President Barack Obama expressed the widely held view that an agreement on the debt ceiling and deficit reduction would remove the uncertainty that is holding back business investment , growth , and employment .
In other words , America ’ s fiscal problems explain its extremely weak economic recovery .
Once a fiscal deal is done , government can step aside and let the private sector drive the structural changes that are needed to restore a pattern of inclusive growth .
To be fair , there have been exceptions to this stance .
In the US , a postwar alliance of government , business , and academia created the human capital and technology base of a dynamic economy , reinforced by the post-Sputnik commitment to scientific and technological excellence and innovation .
In Germany , the post-2000 reforms that reset the economy ’ s productivity , flexibility , and competitiveness have proved crucial to the country ’ s current economic strength and resilience .
Despite these examples , economic and financial commentators appear increasingly puzzled about the weak US recovery , with its modest GDP growth and meager employment gains .
Growth estimates since the 2008 crisis have been revised downward several times .
The political narrative runs in parallel .
A recent ( admittedly partisan ) study by the US Congress ’ s Joint Economic Committee documents the relative weakness of the current recovery .
Indeed , the differences between the current situation and other postwar US recoveries are so large that the term “ recovery ” in today ’ s context is dubious .
But US leaders nonetheless accept the cyclical view of the economy , see a weak recovery , and blame it on post-crisis policy failures .
But , while that might play well politically , the sensible conclusion is that this is not just a cyclical recovery , but rather the beginning of a delayed process of structural adaptation to a rapidly shifting global economy , to emerging economies ’ growth and shifting comparative advantage , and to powerful technological forces .
While these changes are difficult to think about with any degree of precision , that doesn ’ t make them unimportant .
Of course , no one would deny that there are cyclical elements in the downturn of 2008 .
But they were accompanied by structural imbalances that had been building over at least 15 years , and that are at the heart of the US economy ’ s inability to bounce back in a normal cyclical way .
Skeptics might well question why , if these alleged structural imbalances are now impeding GDP and employment growth , they did not appear before the crisis .
The answer is that they did , but not in growth and employment figures .
Other signals were missed , ignored , or deemed unimportant .
A short list of these signals would include excess consumption ( now gone ) and deficient savings , based on an asset bubble and high debt ; a persistent and growing current-account deficit ( signaling that domestic consumption and investment exceeded income and output ) ; and negligible net employment growth ( over two decades ) in the economy ’ s tradable sector .
With domestic aggregate demand in short supply , the only functioning growth engine , external trade in goods and services , is not an employment engine .
Missing all of these signals produced the pre-crisis illusion of sustainable growth and employment , and helps explain why the crisis , rather than its causes , is viewed as the culprit .
The crisis , however , merely exposed the underlying imbalances and unwound some of them .
The “ grand bargain ” that PIMCO CEO Mohamed El-Erian recently alluded to in describing the appropriate response to the current situation in the US needs to include a fiscal stabilization plan .
But it also must include a shift to a policy framework that accurately reflects the non-cyclical nature of the longer-term structural adaptations that will be required to restore growth and employment .
A Daughter of Dictatorship and Democracy
SEOUL – It is something of a cliché question in South Korea nowadays : Who would be the country ’ s next president if the election were held tomorrow , rather than in December 2012 ?
Numerous opinion polls show Park Geun-hye of the ruling Grand National Party ( GNP ) to be the leading candidate .
If elected , she would be South Korea ’ s first woman president , and , for her rivals , her dominant position in the race is an uncomfortable but unassailable fact .
South Korean voters of all ages and regions have welcomed Park as a candidate for their country ’ s leadership .
Her political style is both refreshing and relevant , because she comes across as sincere and forthright at a time when the public is hungry for moral leadership .
And she has an astonishing talent for simplifying complicated issues accurately , which she likely learned – along with how to interpret and manipulate the political connotations of every issue – from her father , former President Park Chung-hee .
Acclaimed as a national hero among radical right-wingers , the iron-fisted Park Chung-hee ruled South Korea from 1963 to 1979 , in the wake of the 1961 military coup , only to be assassinated by his intelligence chief .
His daughter is proud of his legacy , which marked the beginning of South Korea ’ s economic boom .
Indeed , as a pillar of export-oriented modernity , Park Chung-hee was once lionized as the archetype of a modernizing political leadership in military-authoritarian states .
At home , he still ranks first in popularity among the country ’ s heads of state , kindling nostalgia like a popular old record – a corollary to people ’ s frustration and anger at the current government of President Lee Myung-bak .
Park , who lost her first bid for the GNP ’ s nomination to Lee in 2007 , needs to ensure that no rupture with her erstwhile rival knocks her off the path to victory in 2012 .
An astute politician , Park did not hesitate to campaign wholeheartedly for Lee the last time around – a move that , as part of long-term political strategy , made perfect sense .
To many South Koreans , the election is now Park ’ s to lose .
No candidate on the horizon seems able to stop her .
If she wins , it will be the result of her seriousness and tenacity , not her political heritage .
No one in South Korea ’ s conservative movement doubts that Park is one of them .
And , as an icon of the right , she is well aware that she cannot afford to betray her status .
Despite her charisma , Park is neither a Sarah Palin nor an Eva Peron .
Indeed , she looks more like a Korean Margaret Thatcher – a lady not for turning , in Thatcher ’ s famous phrase , and with clearly thought-through political principles animating her actions .
In any case , she seems destined to establish a new South Korea focusing on her landmark pledge ‘ jul pu se , ’ literally meaning ‘ reduce-loosen-strengthen tax-cuts , ’ deregulation , and law and order , not just to add another chapter to her father ’ s old book .
Her administration would mark a fresh departure from the country ’ s troubled recent past .
Left-leaning pundits claim that the dictator ’ s daughter has the same autocratic vision as her father , though Park invariably prefers incremental change to radical measures , and cut her political teeth in the tough-minded politics of the GNP .
Others take a flagrantly sexist stance , arguing that a woman president would be a non-starter as long as the North Korean regime continues to threaten national security .
Although these criticisms don ’ t seem to bother the electorate very much , Park ’ s path to victory may yet prove narrower than her supporters expect .
She has been called the “ Queen of Elections , ” in particular since she won a campaign in 2006 after being slashed with a box cutter by a deranged man .
But she must convincingly outline practical strategies to resolve South Korea ’ s most serious problems , including high unemployment , worsening educational performance , and North Korea ’ s nuclear weapons program .
Ms. Park once pledged to provide loans for working-class families from elementary school to college years , while contending that local universities should be empowered to have more autonomy .
She favors engagement policy and the six-party talks so as to resolve the nuclear troubles .
Come presidential election-day in 2012 , South Korean voters will pick the candidate who embodies pragmatism and centrism over a partisan or ideologue .
Park ’ s success will depend , in the end , on the effectiveness of her campaign in further defining her character along those lines .
Unlike former Peruvian dictator Alberto Fujimori ’ s daughter , who lost her presidential bid in Peru last month , Park is likely to defy her family ’ s tragic history .
If she does , she will be Asia ’ s most powerful woman , perhaps the most powerful in the world , at the end of next year .
A Day for Planetary Justice
PRINCETON – What we are doing to our planet , to our children and grandchildren , and to the poor , by our heedless production of greenhouse gases , is one of the great moral wrongs of our age .
On October 24 , you can stand up against this injustice .
October 24 is 350 Day .
The name comes from the number of parts per million of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that , according to Jim Hansen , perhaps the world ’ s leading climate scientist , we should not exceed if we are to avoid potentially catastrophic climate change .
It is a measure of the seriousness of our problem that CO2 is already at 386 ppm , and is rising by two ppm each year .
The need to cut greenhouse gases has become increasingly clear as predictions of global warming – denounced as “ alarmist ” when they were first made just a few years ago – have repeatedly turned out to have been too conservative .
We are approaching a point of no return , at which feedback loops will kick in and continue to warm the planet , no matter what we do .
The melting of arctic ice is one example .
Four hundred years ago , explorers sought the legendary “ Northeast Passage ” across the north of Europe and Russia to China .
They found the arctic ice impenetrable , and soon gave up their quest .
This year , commercial vessels successfully navigated the Northeast Passage .
That is one of many recent dramatic signs that our climate is changing and that our planet is warmer than it has been for a very long time .
But ice-free arctic waters are more than a symptom of global warming .
They are themselves a cause of further warming : ice and snow reflect the sun ’ s rays .
An ice-free surface absorbs more warmth from the sun than one covered in snow or ice . In other words , our greenhouse gas emissions have , by causing enough warming to melt the arctic ice , created a feedback loop that will generate more warming , and melt more ice , even if we were to stop emitting all greenhouse gases tomorrow .
Other feedback loops pose a similar danger .
In Siberia , vast quantities of methane , an extremely potent greenhouse gas , are locked up in what used to be called “ permafrost ” – regions in which it was assumed that the ground was permanently frozen .
But areas that used to be frozen are now thawing , releasing methane and thus contributing to further warming – and to further thawing , which releases more methane .
Developing nations are grasping just how outrageous the current distribution of greenhouse-gas emissions really is .
At the United Nations Summit on Climate Change in September , President Paul Kagame of Rwanda pointed out that , while developed nations outside Africa are almost entirely responsible for the problem , its greatest impact will probably be on Africa , which has few resources to cope with the challenge .
Kagame then suggested giving every country an annual per capita quota for CO2 emissions , and allowing developing countries that are below the quota to trade their excess quota with countries that are above theirs .
The money that developing countries would receive for this would not be aid , but rather a recognition that the rich nations must pay for something that in the past they simply appropriated : far more than their fair share of our atmosphere ’ s capacity to absorb our waste gases .
Sri Lanka took a similar stance , using studies from the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to calculate that in 2008 , environmentally permissible carbon emissions totaled no more than 2,172 kilograms per person .
In fact , the world ’ s per capita emissions were 4,700 kilograms , or more than double the permissible limit .
But , while emissions in the rich nations were far above the permissible limit , Sri Lankan emissions were , at 660 kilograms , well below it .
As Sri Lanka ’ s government pointed out , “ That means low-emitting countries like us could not emit more because our space has already been exploited by developed or global heavy polluting countries without our consent . ”
This situation is an injustice of vast proportions , reminiscent of – and arguably much worse than – the now-repudiated colonialism of the Western powers in the nineteenth century .
The task of remedying it must begin at the meeting on climate change that will be held in Copenhagen in December .
Many political leaders have expressed support for strong action on climate change , but what most of them regard as “ strong action ” will not be enough to get us back below 350 ppm .
In some countries , including the United States , there are major political obstacles to taking even modest steps .
On October 24 , people in nearly every country will be taking action to raise awareness of the need for an international treaty to bring our atmosphere back to 350 ppm of CO2 .
There will be climbers hanging banners high in the Himalayas , where the glaciers are melting , and scuba divers at Australia ’ s Great Barrier Reef , which is threatened by climate change .
Churches will ring bells 350 times , 350 cyclists will circle towns , and , in many places , 350 trees will be planted .
At www.350.org you can find out what is happening near you and join in , or put your own idea online .
But don ’ t just sit back and hope that others will do enough to make an impact .
One day your grandchildren will ask you : what did you do to meet the greatest moral challenge of your time ?
A Day of Liberation
When I was seven years old , in 1960 , my grandmother Angelica opened my eyes to the meaning of 8 May 1945 , the day when Nazi Germany surrendered and World War II ended in Europe .
We were spending our summer holidays in Normandy where the liberation of Europe from Nazism had started on D-Day , 6 June 1944 .
One evening , I listened to my parents and my grandmother talking about the past .
I have forgotten the details of their conversation , but I can still hear my grandmother ’ s sigh of relief when she said “ Thank God we lost that war ! ”
From a child ’ s perspective , it wasn ’ t self-evident that losing was a good thing .
But of course , my grandmother was right to equate defeat with liberation .
The more I have thought about the lesson she taught me 45 years ago , the clearer I have seen another , less obvious dimension in what she said : It is “ we ” who lost the war .
Collectively , the Germans had not been the innocent victims of a small gang of criminal outsiders called “ Nazis ” – Nazism had been an inside ideology supported by millions of Germans , and every German was liable for its atrocities whether or not he or she had adhered to it individually .
In today ’ s Germany , an overwhelming majority subscribes to the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation – not only for Europe , but also for Germany itself .
Compared to public opinion in 1960 , that ’ s certainly an enormous progress .
But paradoxically , it may also contain an element of forgetfulness , because it tends to conceal the fact that liberation required a military defeat .
To use my grandmother ’ s parlance , it is not “ us ” who were the liberators , but “ them ” .
The way people see the past tells us more about their present attitudes than about the past itself .
This is what the term “ politics of memory ” is meant to indicate .
And this is why it doesn ’ t matter whether the relevant events happened 60 years ago ( as World War II ) , 90 years ( as in the case of the Armenian genocide ) or even 600 years ( such as the battle of Kosovo in 1389 ) .
A violent conflict in the past may survive as a war of memories in the present , as can be observed in the current dispute between China and South Korea on one side , and Japan on the other .
A war of memories , in turn , may sometimes lead to a violent conflict in the future .
Former perpetrators often try to de-legitimize their former victims ’ moral superiority by claiming they were victims themselves .
Therefore , the 60th anniversary of the firebombing of Dresden by Allied forces on 13 February 1945 has probably been a more crucial moment in terms of the German “ politics of memory ” than the 60th anniversary of 8 May 1945 is going to be .
Far-right groups infamously dubbed the attack by which at least 30,000 people were killed “ Dresden ’ s Holocaust of bombs . ”
Fortunately , their propaganda campaign has been a failure .
Although it is true that thousands of the civilians killed in Dresden and other German cities were innocent at an individual level , there can be no doubt it was morally imperative that Germany be defeated collectively .
On the left side of the German political spectrum , the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation remains unchallenged .
However , it is sometimes repressed that the massive use of force had been necessary to achieve that result .
Left-wing pacifism tends to overlook this simple fact .
Its slogan “ Never again war ! ” is only half the truth – the other half is “ Never again appeasement ! ” 8 May 1945 was not “ zero hour , ” as a popular saying in Germany goes .
It had an antecedent , that is , a lack of pre-emptive resistance at home and abroad to the threat that built up in Nazi Germany during the 1930 ’ s .
There is yet another lesson to be learned .
Yes , 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation to which the Soviet army contributed decisively .
But for millions of Central and East Europeans , liberation was followed by Stalin ’ s oppressive regime .
The current war of memories between the Baltic republics and Russia , with regard to the international celebration in Moscow on 9 May this year , reminds Germany of a special historic responsibility .
The German-Soviet non-aggression treaty , the so-called Hitler-Stalin pact , concluded in August 1939 , had been supplemented by a secret appendix dividing the border states Finland , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland and Romania into spheres of interest for the two parties .
But excusing Nazi atrocities by pointing to Stalinist crimes is an intellectually and morally unacceptable stratagem .
When Chancellor Schröder travels to Moscow for the Red Square celebrations , he should bear in mind Nazi Germany ’ s contribution to the Baltic tragedy .
On 8 May this year , public speakers will remind us how important it is not to forget .
They will stress that if the lessons of history are not learned , history is bound to repeat itself .
All this is perfectly true .
But personally , I will also remember my grandmother ’ s sentence “ Thank God we lost that war ! ”
Thank God – and thanks to all those brave Allied soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the sake of Europe ’ s liberty .
Crashing the SDR
SANTA BARBARA – The Chinese government ’ s campaign to have its currency , the renminbi , included in the International Monetary Fund ’ s reserve asset appears to be on the brink of success .
Last week , IMF staff formally recommended adding the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determines the value of its so-called Special Drawing Rights ( SDRs ) .
The addition of the renminbi to the basket , which currently includes the US dollar , the euro , the British pound , and the Japanese yen , would provide China with a boost to its prestige .
More important , it would advance the government ’ s efforts to internationalize the renminbi .
But it would also be a mistake .
The decision to recommend the renminbi ’ s inclusion , far from having been made on sound economic grounds , can only be understood as political .
As such , the long-term consequences are likely to be regrettable .
On a purely technical basis , the renminbi ’ s qualifications for inclusion in the SDR basket are questionable .
Traditionally , the IMF has insisted on two criteria : a currency ’ s issuing country must be among the world ’ s leading exporters , and the currency must be “ freely usable ” – widely used and traded .
As the world ’ s largest exporter , China clearly meets the first condition .
The second , however , is probably still beyond its reach .
The renminbi is by no means in the same league as the SDR basket ’ s four incumbent currencies .
In 2014 , China ’ s currency ranked seventh in global central-bank reserves , eighth in international bond issuance , and 11th in global currency trading .
Moreover , the renminbi remains non-convertible for most capital transactions , China ’ s financial markets are primitive , and trading margins for the exchange rate are still set daily by the monetary authorities .
Indeed , as recently as August , the IMF was skeptical about adding the renminbi to the SDR basket , saying that “ significant work ” was still needed , and suggesting that a decision should be put off until 2016 in order to ensure a “ smooth ” transition .
So why did the IMF flip ?
The answer is obvious : China mounted a full-court press to change minds .
In August , the currency ’ s exchange-rate regime was loosened slightly .
Renminbi-denominated government bonds were issued in London , and plans were laid to create new trading platforms for the currency in several European financial centers .
And Chinese policymakers made it abundantly clear how unhappy they would be with a negative decision .
Their pressure paid off .
One by one , Western governments fell in line behind the renminbi , despite its practical limitations .
The Fund got the message , and now the fix is in .
The recommendation to enlarge the SDR basket has been warmly backed by Christine Lagarde , the IMF ’ s managing director , and a final decision by the Fund ’ s executive board is expected at the end of the month .
Many would argue that this is a positive development .
Certainly , it mollifies China ’ s leaders , offering them a stronger incentive to continue to work within the existing international monetary regime .
Recent Chinese initiatives , especially the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank , have given rise to fears that the country intends to build a new set of international institutions to compete with Western-dominated organizations like the IMF .
The decision to add the renminbi to the SDR basket may have put that danger into remission .
On the other hand , the move sets a worrying precedent , injecting politics into a policy area that had been governed by objective economic considerations .
Conceivably , over the longer term , China ’ s successful campaign could now open the door to lobbying by other governments to include their currencies as well .
Why not add the Swiss franc or the Canadian dollar ?
Or , for that matter , why not include the Russian ruble or Indian rupee ?
What was once the dignified preserve of obviously elite currencies could become the site of messy political battles for elevated status .
Of course , it can be argued that China ’ s recent economic trajectory means that it is only a matter of time before the renminbi does become a match for the SDR ’ s incumbents .
After all , international use of the currency has been growing exponentially .
But that optimistic assessment overestimates the renminbi ’ s prospects and illustrates the danger of linear extrapolation of the past into the future .
Likewise , use of the renminbi for the purpose of invoicing and settling trade with China is bound to continue growing .
But in terms of the all-important roles of a currency as an investment vehicle or reserve asset , the outlook for the renminbi is much less promising , owing to China ’ s still-tight capital controls and low level of financial development .
Nor is inclusion of the renminbi in the SDR basket likely to provide as big a boost to the currency ’ s internationalization as many believe .
Some central banks may decide to follow suit , adding renminbi-denominated assets to their reserves to match the composition of the basket .
But the increase will be marginal at best – some $ 40 billion in the next few years , according to the IMF ’ s calculations .
With global reserves now totaling more than $ 10 trillion , that is a mere drop in the proverbial bucket .
The political reasons for including the renminbi in the SDR are all too clear .
Unfortunately , the risks of doing so are no less obvious .
A Defeat for International Tax Cooperation
NEW YORK – Most of the world ’ s governments – eager to mobilize more tax revenues to finance development and curb pervasive tax-avoidance schemes , such as those revealed in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks scandal last year – have an interest in collaborating on taxation matters .
Yet at the Third International Conference on Financing for Development , held in Addis Ababa last month , the momentum toward strengthening international tax cooperation came to an abrupt halt .
Developed countries blocked a proposal at the conference to establish an intergovernmental tax body within the United Nations to replace the current UN Committee of Experts .
These countries insist that tax cooperation should take place exclusively under the leadership of the OECD , a body that they control .
The rest of the world should hope this will prove to be a pause rather than an end to progress on international tax cooperation , which began 13 years ago , at the first International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey , Mexico .
Two years later , in 2004 , the United Nations Economic and Social Council ( ECOSOC ) upgraded its “ ad hoc group ” of tax experts to a regular committee .
This meant that the experts would meet regularly and have an expanded mandate that went beyond merely updating a model double-taxation treaty .
Four years later , at the Second Conference on Financing for Development , in Doha , Qatar , policymakers acknowledged that more needed to be done in tax matters , and asked ECOSOC to consider strengthening institutional arrangements .
And then , in the year leading up to the Addis Ababa conference , the UN Secretary-General endorsed the need for “ an intergovernmental committee on tax cooperation , under the auspices of the United Nations . ”
His endorsement , along with strong support from nongovernmental organizations and the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation , gave greater force to the demand by developing countries , organized around the Group of 77 and China , for an equal voice in setting global tax norms .
Up until the 11th hour of negotiations in Addis Ababa , they stood firm in calling for an intergovernmental body with the mandate and resources to create a coherent global framework for international tax cooperation .
But to no avail : Developed countries , led by the United States and the United Kingdom – home to many of the multinational corporations implicated in the “ Lux Leaks ” – succeeded in blocking this much-needed advance in global governance .
In the end , the Addis Ababa Action Agenda provides that the current Committee of Experts will continue to function according to its 2004 mandate , with three additional meeting days per year , all funded through voluntary contributions .
That is a profoundly disappointing outcome .
The developed countries have an argument – but not a convincing one .
The OECD , whose members are essentially the world ’ s 34 richest countries , certainly has the capacity to set international standards on taxation .
Yet the domination of a select group of countries over tax norms has meant that , in reality , the global governance architecture for taxation has not kept pace with globalization .
The Monterrey Consensus reached in 2002 included a call to enhance “ the voice and participation of developing countries in international economic decision-making and norms-setting . ”
But although the OECD invites some developing countries to participate in its discussions to establish norms , it offers them no decision-making power .
The OECD is thus a weak surrogate for a globally representative intergovernmental forum .
Such a body must operate under the auspices of the United Nations , which bears the institutional legitimacy necessary to respond effectively to the challenges of globalization with coherent global standards to combat abusive tax practices and ensure fair taxation of corporate profits worldwide .
Despite the disappointment in Addis Ababa , the call for reform of the international tax system is not likely to be silenced .
Instead , it will grow louder on all sides , as the developed countries ’ counter-productive resistance to any give and take on international cooperation results in a tsunami of unilateral tax measures beyond OECD control .
The Making of Euro-Jihadism
MADRID – The Belgian historian Henri Pirenne linked Europe ’ s birth as a Christian continent in the eighth century to its rupture with Islam .
Pirenne probably would never have expected a Muslim ghetto in Brussels to emerge , much less become a hub of jihadism , with marginalized and angry young Muslims revolting against Europe from within its own borders .
Divorce is not an option these days .
But nor is the kind of marriage that the Islam scholar Tariq Ramadan advocates .
Ramadan , a grandson of the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt , is a Swiss citizen and a resident of the United Kingdom who argues that Islamic ethics and values should be injected into the European system .
Europe would then not just tolerate Islam , but actually embrace it as an integral part of itself .
The problem with Ramadan ’ s vision is that Europe is an overwhelmingly secular continent , with a profoundly forward-thinking approach to ethics .
Islamic societies , by contrast , are both deeply religious and deeply embedded in the past .
When Islamists speak of political or social reform , they are typically looking backward , hoping to resurrect a time when core European principles – from gender equality to gay marriage – were repudiated .
Even Muslims who support the modernization of Islam would typically stop well short of Europe ’ s ethical vision .
The flaws in Ramadan ’ s proposed solution to Euro-jihadism mirror the flaws in his explanation for the phenomenon , which he attributes largely to Europe ’ s involvement in the wars in the Middle East , its supposed collusion with Israel ’ s suppression of the Palestinians , and its support of Arab autocrats .
“ We cannot , ” he writes , “ support dictatorships … be silent when civilians are massacred south of our borders , and hope that we will not receive a response to the injustice and humiliation we have provoked . ”
But it is the United States that launched wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , offers unconditional support to Israel , and has repeatedly propped up Arab autocrats .
And it is Europe that has consistently criticized these policies – often harshly .
Yet America is not being subjected to a major surge of jihadist sentiment within its borders .
It might have helped that US President Barack Obama backed away from some of these policies .
When the Arab Spring uprisings began , for example , he was quick to cut support for Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , allowing protesters – inspired by the Western model of democracy – to secure regime change .
The return to autocracy in Egypt in 2013 , via Abdel Fattah el-Sisi ’ s coup d ’ état , certainly was not aided by the US or Europe , both of which supported the democratically elected Muslim Brotherhood .
Europe has offered even more direct help to Arab countries in recent years .
If it were not for Europe ’ s military intervention , Libyans would still be living under the tyrannical Muammar el-Qaddafi .
True , Europe could have done more to prevent the ensuing chaos in Libya .
But the people of Libya surely must take responsibility for the proliferation of competing militias that refuse to unite to save their state from total collapse .
More broadly , though the West – especially the US – has made grave policy errors in the Arab world over the last 50 years , external powers cannot be blamed entirely for the region ’ s meltdown .
That is the result of a profound civilizational crisis – one that can be redressed only by the people of the Arab world .
If Europe ’ s foreign policy is not responsible for the Arab world ’ s current turmoil , it certainly cannot be the reason for the rise of jihadism within its own borders .
The real problem lies at home : a disastrous deficit of effective policies related to social justice , education , housing , and employment for young European Muslims .
Marginalization generates frustration , which is subsequently fed by growing Islamophobia and the rise of raucous right-wing movements throughout the continent .
This link is apparent in the fact that the majority of European jihadists come from underprivileged backgrounds .
Not particularly well versed in the true teachings of Islam , and lacking opportunities to improve their lives , they become easy prey for extremists .
Jihadism , with its absolute certainty and grand mission , offers a sense of purpose , pride , and identity – not to mention adventure – and an outlet for their anger against the “ home ” that has denied them those things .
The story of America ’ s Muslims is the measure of Europe ’ s failure .
Like most Americans , Muslims in the US maintain a certain amount of faith in the American dream .
They are mostly middle class , and , despite all the talk about rising economic inequality , they have not given up on the belief that , in the US , hard work and initiative are rewarded .
America is a country of immigrants , with a dynamic economy that has enabled newcomers , time and again , to achieve great success .
In Europe , by contrast , improving one ’ s social standing has always been very difficult ; and , at a time of economic stagnation and staggeringly high unemployment , it is not getting any easier .
Socially , America also offers something to Muslims that Europe does not .
Its fundamentally religious culture enables Muslims to retain their identity to a far greater extent than in secular Europe .
Indeed , America ’ s core values – personal responsibility and constitutional patriotism – can be easier for Muslims to swallow than Europe ’ s more aggressively secular brand of liberalism .
As a result , integration and assimilation tend to be easier for Muslims in America .
All of this suggests that Europe must look inward to address homegrown jihadism effectively .
This does not mean that it should temper its secularism , much less its liberal values .
Rather , Europe must breathe life into its own “ European dream , ” ensuring that all people have access to real opportunities to improve their lives .
Otherwise , it will face a lost generation of millions of young Europeans – Muslim and otherwise .
The New Climate Economics
NEW YORK – This Friday , in its latest comprehensive assessment of the evidence on global warming , the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will show that the world ’ s climate scientists are more certain than ever that human activity – largely combustion of fossil fuels – is causing temperatures and sea levels to rise .
In recent years , a series of extreme weather events – including Hurricane Sandy in New York and New Jersey , floods in China , and droughts in the American Midwest , Russia , and many developing countries – have caused immense damage .
Last week , Mexico experienced simultaneous hurricanes in the Pacific and in the Gulf of Mexico that devastated towns and cities in their path .
Climate change will be a major driver of such events , and we risk much worse .
This puts a new debate center stage : how to reconcile increased action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions with strong economic growth .
It is a debate that is already mired in controversy .
As most countries have started making serious investments in renewable energy , and many are implementing carbon prices and regulations , critics complain that such policies may undermine growth .
With the global economy still recovering from the 2008 financial crash , higher energy costs – not yet fully offset by greater energy efficiency – are worrying business and political leaders .
The advent of shale gas has confused the energy debate even more .
If gas is substituted for coal , it can be a useful bridge to a low-carbon future .
But astonishingly , it is coal , the dirtiest fuel , that is experiencing the sharpest increase in use .
Companies and investors are hedging their bets by taking a few resource-efficiency measures and investing in some low-carbon assets , but leaving their high-carbon portfolios and activities largely intact .
Policy vacillation in some countries has not helped .
Advocates of stronger action respond that low-carbon investments can generate much stronger , cleaner growth .
They point to the savings available from energy efficiency , and to the market opportunities generated by clean-energy technologies as the processes of learning and discovery take hold .
They seek to demonstrate the benefits that a more sustainable pattern of development can bring to the world ’ s cities , to people ’ s health ( from the reduction in air pollution ) , to energy security , and to the ability of the world ’ s poor to access energy .
And they propose green bonds and public investment banks to finance new infrastructure and jobs at a time when world interest rates are low and demand is depressed in many countries .
These are serious economic debates , but too often they have become entangled in ideological disputes about the appropriate response to the economic crisis and the value of government intervention in markets .
That is regrettable .
Climate change is not a partisan issue , and climate policy is essentially market-based .
It is about correcting market failures so that markets and entrepreneurship can play their proper role of ensuring innovation and efficient resource allocation .
In order to escape this impasse , we have helped to launch the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate .
The Commission ’ s New Climate Economy project brings together seven leading policy research institutes from six continents , overseen by a panel of former heads of government and finance ministers and prominent business leaders , and advised by a panel of leading economists from across the world .
Its purpose is to provide authoritative new evidence concerning how governments and businesses can achieve stronger economic growth while simultaneously addressing climate risks .
Few governments or investors start from the standpoint of climate change .
They want to promote investment and economic growth , create jobs , stabilize public finances , expand markets , turn profits , ensure reliable energy and food supplies , produce goods and services , reduce poverty , and build cities .
So the primary question that we need to ask is not whether we can reduce emissions , but how public policy can help to achieve these core goals while reducing emissions and building a more climate-resilient economy .
There is now a lot of experience around the world in this area .
When the Stern Review on the economics of climate change was published seven years ago , the subject was largely theoretical .
Now countries at all stages of development are pursuing new patterns of economic growth that take climate into account .
Germany , for example , is planning the world ’ s most ambitious low-carbon energy transition , based on energy conservation and renewables .
South Korea has made “ green growth ” a central economic goal .
Mexico ’ s 2012 General Law on Climate Change has put it on course for a major increase in clean power .
China has placed the industrial development of green technologies at the top of its agenda .
Ethiopia is seeking to move to lower-carbon farming .
Brazil has significantly reduced the rate of deforestation in the Amazon .
Some major businesses are providing powerful examples of what is possible .
Unilever has committed to the sustainable sourcing of agricultural and forest products .
Coca-Cola is phasing out all use of climate-polluting hydrofluorocarbons .
The retail giant Wal-Mart is driving emissions reduction throughout its supply chain .
Meanwhile , the World Bank and the European Investment Bank have stopped lending to high-emission coal plants .
Yet genuine questions remain about how fast economies should move on to a low-carbon path , and the most effective way to do so .
Some low-carbon policies have clearly been expensive , while other , apparently cost-effective options , have not been pursued at all .
Any structural transformation involves costs , trade-offs , and uncertainties , and it is vital that we understand these properly .
Powerful interests will , of course , oppose any low-carbon transition , dismissing and often drowning out those who stand to benefit .
That makes it even more important to clarify the choices .
As science makes clear how imperative the climate question is , it is time for economists and policymakers to explain how it can be answered .
Only the Poor Die Young
ROTTERDAM – People who are lower on the socioeconomic ladder ( indicated by their level of education , occupation , or income ) have shorter and less healthy lives , on average , than those on higher rungs .
Indeed , life expectancy at birth often varies by 5-10 years , depending on social and economic well-being , with poorer people spending 10-20 more years of life suffering from illness or disability than their wealthier counterparts .
In the nineteenth century , this situation would not have been surprising , given low average income , widespread poverty , and lack of social security .
But such data are commonly reported for high-income countries today , including those ranking high on indices of economic prosperity and human development – even Western Europe ’ s highly developed welfare states .
Since the end of World War II , Western European countries have tried to reduce socioeconomic inequality , or offset its consequences , through progressive taxation , social security programs , and a wide range of collectively financed provisions , such as public housing , education , health care , and cultural and leisure facilities .
But , while these policies have reduced inequalities in some social and economic outcomes , including income , housing quality , and health-care access , they have been insufficient to eliminate health inequalities .
Long-term time-series data indicate that the socioeconomic mortality gap narrowed before the 1950 ’ s , but has grown substantially since then .
More puzzling is the fact that more generous welfare policies do not translate into smaller health disparities .
Even the Nordic countries – world leaders when it comes to creating universal and well-designed welfare policies that cover citizens from cradle to grave – face significant health disparities , despite their relatively low income inequality .
To be sure , modern welfare states have far from abolished social inequality , with disparities in access to material and human resources continuing to generate highly unequal lives among their citizens .
But the welfare state ’ s aim has never been radical redistribution of wealth .
Rather , welfare policies are intended to create a compromise between the interests of employees and employers , laborers and the middle classes .
As a result , their redistributive effects are modest .
So , while a partial failure of the welfare state may help to explain the persistence of health inequalities , one must look elsewhere to understand – and reverse – their rise .
Two possible explanations have emerged from the rapidly growing scientific literature on the subject : selective upward social mobility and delayed diffusion of behavioral change .
In reality , both factors are at work .
During the twentieth century , social mobility increased slowly but steadily in all high-income countries , with educational achievement and occupational status depending less on family background and more on cognitive ability and other personal characteristics .
As a result , the lower socioeconomic groups have not only shrunk in size , but have probably also become more homogeneous in terms of personal characteristics that increase the risk of health problems .
Moreover , people with a higher socioeconomic position tend to adopt new behaviors first , and to abandon more readily behaviors that are found to damage health , such as smoking and high-fat diets .
Given this , new behavioral recommendations by health authorities tend to exacerbate health inequalities , at least temporarily .
Significant disparities in smoking , physical exercise , diet , and alcohol consumption afflict many of Western Europe ’ s welfare states .
The welfare system , which was created to combat poverty , has been less effective against “ diseases of affluence ” like heart disease and lung cancer .
All of this highlights the need for creative solutions to disparities that unnecessarily and unfairly blight the lives of those who have the least , generate massive health-care costs , and pose a barrier to increased labor-force participation ( impeding efforts in some countries to raise the retirement age ) .
In the last few decades , social policy in most Western European countries has moved away from redistribution .
This is a mistake , given that the consequences of this shift – rising income inequality , weaker social safety nets , and reduced health-care access – will aggravate health inequalities in the long run .
In fact , more , better-targeted redistributive policies , which account for the effects of selective upward social mobility and different rates of diffusion of behavioral change , are crucial to improving health outcomes in lower socioeconomic groups .
Income support should be complemented by preventive health programs , while health literacy programs could help to diminish the link between low cognitive ability and bad health .
Equal access to health care is not enough .
Reducing inequalities in health outcomes requires more intensive health care for patients in lower socioeconomic brackets , tailored to their specific needs and challenges .
For example , revenues from tobacco taxation , which disproportionately affects lower income groups , should be used to fund cessation-support programs that target disadvantaged smokers .
Significant and persistent health inequality indicates that , by raising the health levels of those with lower incomes or less education , massive strides could be made in improving populations ’ overall health .
This may require reshaping the welfare system to some extent , but the payoff would be well worth the effort .
The Mouse Click that Roared
CAMBRIDGE – Until recently , cyber security has primarily interested computer geeks and cloak-and-dagger types .
The Internet ’ s creators , part of a small , enclosed community , were very comfortable with an open system in which security was not a primary concern .
But , with some three billion or so users on the Web nowadays , that very openness has become a serious vulnerability ; indeed , it is endangering the vast economic opportunities that the Internet has opened for the world .
A “ cyber attack ” can take any number of forms , including simple probes , defacement of Web sites , denial-of-service attacks , espionage , and destruction of data .
And the term “ cyber war , ” though best defined as any hostile action in cyberspace that amplifies or is equivalent to major physical violence , remains equally protean , reflecting definitions of “ war ” that range from armed conflict to any concerted effort to solve a problem ( for example , “ war on poverty ” ) .
Cyber war and cyber espionage are largely associated with states , while cyber crime and cyber terrorism are mostly associated with non-state actors .
The highest costs currently stem from espionage and crime ; but , over the next decade or so , cyber war and cyber terrorism may become greater threats than they are today .
Moreover , as alliances and tactics evolve , the categories may increasingly overlap .
Terrorists might buy malware from criminals , and governments might find it useful to hide behind both .
Some people argue that deterrence does not work in cyberspace , owing to the difficulties of attribution .
But that is facile : inadequate attribution affects inter-state deterrence as well , yet it still operates .
Even when the source of an attack can be successfully disguised under a “ false flag , ” governments may find themselves sufficiently enmeshed in symmetrically interdependent relationships such that a major attack would be counterproductive .
China , for example , would lose from an attack that severely damaged the American economy , and vice versa .
An unknown attacker may also be deterred by cyber-security measures .
If firewalls are strong , or redundancy and resilience allow quick recovery , or the prospect of a self-enforcing response ( “ an electric fence ” ) seems possible , an attack becomes less attractive .
While accurate attribution of the ultimate source of a cyber attack is sometimes difficult , the determination does not have to be airtight .
To the extent that false flags are imperfect and rumors of the source of an attack are widely deemed credible ( though not legally probative ) , reputational damage to an attacker ’ s soft power may contribute to deterrence .
Finally , a reputation for offensive capability and a declared policy that keeps open the means of retaliation can help to reinforce deterrence .
Of course , non-state actors are harder to deter , so improved defenses such as pre-emption and human intelligence become important in such cases .
But , among states , even nuclear deterrence was more complex than it first looked , and that is doubly true of deterrence in the cyber domain .
Given its global nature , the Internet requires a degree of international cooperation to be able to function .
Some people call for the cyber equivalent of formal arms-control treaties .
But differences in cultural norms and the difficulty of verification would make such treaties hard to negotiate or implement .
At the same time , it is important to pursue international efforts to develop rules of the road that can limit conflict .
The most promising areas for international cooperation today most likely concern problems posed for states by third parties such as criminals and terrorists .
Russia and China have sought to establish a treaty establishing broad international oversight of the Internet and “ information security , ” which would prohibit deception and embedding malicious code or circuitry that could be activated in the event of war .
But the US has argued that arms-control measures banning offensive capabilities could weaken defenses against attacks and would be impossible to verify or enforce .
Likewise , in terms of political values , the US has resisted agreements that could legitimize authoritarian governments ’ censorship of the Internet – for example , by the “ great firewall of China . ”
Moreover , cultural differences impede any broad agreements on regulating online content .
Nonetheless , it may be possible to identify behaviors like cyber crime that are illegal in many domestic jurisdictions .
Trying to limit all intrusions would be impossible , but one could start with cyber crime and cyber terrorism involving non-state parties .
Here , major states would have an interest in limiting damage by agreeing to cooperate on forensics and controls .
The transnational cyber domain poses new questions about the meaning of national security .
Some of the most important responses must be national and unilateral , focused on hygiene , redundancy , and resilience .
It is likely , however , that major governments will soon discover that the insecurity created by non-state cyber actors will require closer cooperation among governments .
A Practical Agenda for Revolutionary Times
OXFORD – As the world ’ s financial leaders gather for the International Monetary Fund and World Bank spring meetings , many working people around the world are demanding radical change , because they sense that their voices are not being heard .
Those who are supposed to represent them should not ignore this anger and frustration any longer .
According to the 2017 Edelman Trust Barometer , the public ’ s confidence in the status quo has collapsed worldwide , owing to widely held concerns about globalization , innovation , immigration , the erosion of social values , and corruption .
At the same time , the response from elites who regard themselves as the guardians of economic growth has sometimes made matters worse .
If they think they can allay public concerns simply by explaining the benefits of the current global economic system and tweaking policies to compensate those left behind , they are in for a rude awakening .
Earlier this month , the IMF , World Bank , and World Trade Organization published a joint report extolling the benefits of trade as a driver of productivity growth , competition , and consumer choice .
The report ’ s argument in favor of free trade is not new , nor is its recommendation that “ active labor-market policies ” be used to cushion the blow of lost jobs and livelihoods .
What is new is that repeating these claims , without also addressing people ’ s deeper concerns , can now do more harm than good .
Global public opinion has changed dramatically in recent years .
A majority of people worldwide – and up to 72 % of people in France and Italy – now believe that the system has failed them .
Moreover , only 29 % of people across 28 countries now trust government leaders , while three-quarters of those surveyed say they trust reformers who would upend the status quo .
These findings suggest that those defending free trade have lost credibility with the people they hope to persuade .
World leaders need to recognize that today ’ s populist revolts are being fueled by a sense of lost dignity – a sentiment that does not factor into most policymakers ’ prescription for economic growth and compensatory payments .
Working-class voters have lashed out because they feel not just economically abandoned , but also socially disdained and culturally marginalized .
Their vote is the only means they have left to hit back at the establishment .
To address the public ’ s concerns requires a three-part agenda .
The first order of business should be to reach out to those who feel voiceless and unrepresented .
During the US presidential campaign , Donald Trump tapped into this sentiment when he vowed to punish any company that moves jobs to China or Mexico .
As the filmmaker Michael Moore explained prior to the election , American working-class voters were desperate to hear someone promise to take on big business .
The fact that it took a populist plutocrat to do it underscores the extent to which the American labor movement has been extinguished .
Political parties that originally emerged from the labor movement have long since shifted to the “ center . ”
They now accept political contributions from big business , and have accordingly adopting the language of common prosperity and “ consensus politics , ” leaving the many working people who do not share in that prosperity and consensus feeling disregarded and displaced .
Second , the quality of work , and the status that it confers , must be improved .
In wealthy countries , precarious , poorly paid , and even dangerous forms of employment are becoming increasingly common .
A recent Bloomberg Businessweek story describes how temporary workers at auto-parts factories in Alabama are paid just $ 7.25 per hour , and must work in hazardous conditions with no safety training .
In 2010 , these workers suffered work injuries at a 50 % higher rate than unionized auto-parts workers elsewhere .
As the OECD has shown , “ non-standard ” work is proliferating globally .
This trend is contributing to deteriorating working conditions , making workers feel increasingly helpless and vulnerable .
Reversing it will require robust standards to ensure workplace safety , fair pay , and the right to enter into collective-bargaining arrangements .
Governments will have to intervene to set these standards , as they did during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to improve abysmal conditions in factories .
Otherwise , businesses will not be able to behave decently , for fear of being undercut by unscrupulous competitors .
Finally , more opportunities must be created for the next generation – and not just economic opportunities .
Since the 2008 financial crisis , many governments have reduced their investments in health , education , housing , and other forms of human capital .
Many have also cut support for the unemployed , homeless , or indebted .
As a result , those who have fallen behind are deprived not just of resources , but , more important , the chance to pursue their aspirations .
As the IMF , World Bank , and WTO show in their report , free trade and globalization have certainly increased the size of the overall economic pie .
In theory , this should have expanded governments ’ capacity to compensate those left behind and create the conditions for them to get ahead .
In fact , the opposite has happened , owing to government cutbacks since 2008 .
The establishment ’ s agenda has been failing for too long .
And as elites continue to proclaim the benefits of free trade and globalization , they are merely widening the chasm of popular mistrust .
Over the past year , that mistrust has boiled over in many countries , with voters in one election after another rejecting the status quo .
Piecemeal curbs on globalization will not be enough to quell the revolt .
Instead , world leaders must leave their echo chamber , take ordinary people ’ s concerns seriously , diversify their views , and think about why so many have lost faith in the system .
The Fourth Jihadist Wave
STOCKHOLM – Muscular language has become increasingly prevalent in the debate about how to counter the threat of jihadist terrorism .
Television talk-show hosts speculate about when control of Raqqa in Syria or Mosul in Iraq might be wrested from the Islamic State ( ISIS ) , implying that these cities ’ liberation will mark , at the very least , the beginning of the end of the problem .
And in December , Ted Cruz , a Republican contender in the US presidential race , went so far as to raise the specter of nuclear strikes : “ I don ’ t know if sand can glow in the dark , but we ’ re going to find out , ” he said .
Such simplistic sound bites understate the severity of the challenge .
As the International Crisis Group highlights in a recent report , the jihadist threat we are facing is the fourth in a series of increasingly perilous waves .
If we are to avoid creating an even more powerful fifth wave , it is imperative that we learn from the mistakes we made in seeking to counter the previous three .
The first jihadist wave occurred when volunteer fighters from the war against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan returned home and started attacking regimes they considered un-Islamic .
This led to the second , far more deadly jihadist wave , as Al Qaeda launched spectacular attacks against the “ far enemy , ” seeking to draw Western powers into violent confrontation and outright war .
The attacks on the United States , on September 11 , 2001 , marked the crest of this wave .
The global counterterrorist offensive that followed largely succeeded in eliminating Al Qaeda ’ s ability to launch large-scale attacks .
But the 2003 invasion of Iraq created the conditions for the third wave , triggering a vicious sectarian war between Sunni and Shia that allowed Al Qaeda to exploit the chaos of an increasingly fragmented state .
Eventually , the so-called Sunni Awakening broke the back of Al Qaeda ’ s efforts in Iraq , and the 2011 Arab Spring redirected the region ’ s political development .
But the failure to build an inclusive government in Iraq , together with the violent repression of protesters in Syria , offered battle-hardened jihadist leaders an opening to initiate the fourth wave .
This wave is by far the most dangerous .
Tens of thousands of recruits have joined the effort to build a caliphate in the Fertile Crescent .
Meanwhile , ISIS has expanded into numerous other crisis zones and recruited or inspired terrorists within Western societies , as demonstrated by the attacks in Paris , Brussels , and San Bernardino .
Countering this threat will require a vigorous ideological battle against the forces of intolerance and hatred , building on Islam ’ s history of openness and tolerance .
But ideological struggle , on its own , will not be enough .
We must also recognize the true origins of the jihadist threat : the conflicts and state failures ranging from West Africa across the wider Middle East to South Asia .
It was not jihadism that created today ’ s crises .
On the contrary , bad governance and state failure provided jihadism with the opportunity to flourish .
Addressing these root causes will be a daunting , decades-long task .
Much of the region entered the twenty-first century in a deplorable state ; and in most places , things have only gotten worse .
Trying to meet the jihadist challenge with repression , as Egypt is doing today , risks exacerbating the problem .
And incarcerating Islamists often means providing them with an ideal environment for recruitment , indoctrination , and training .
Instead , openings must be created for democratic Islamic political forces to operate .
Despite the scale of the challenge , the West lacks a clear policy on what to press for and how to obtain it .
Clearly , military force must be used .
But retaking Raqqa or Mosul is only the easiest of the tasks facing us .
How many times have Western forces retaken Afghanistan ’ s Helmand province or Anbar province in Iraq , and with what result ?
Far more difficult – and far more important – will be ensuring that legitimate structures of inclusive governance are set up in the places from which ISIS is driven out .
These must address feelings of persecution among Sunni Arabs as well as the victimization of large segments of the population that has fostered rage across the region .
Without such a strategy in place , retaking Raqqa and Mosul will merely be a prelude to an even more violent fifth wave of jihadism , which its committed and experienced practitioners will seek to portray as the final epic battle with “ crusaders ” in the West .
It is no coincidence that ISIS has named its slick propaganda magazine Dabiq , for the name of the place where this Islamic version of Armageddon is prophesied to take place .
We must not hand our enemies what they want on a silver platter .
We must instead wage an ideological battle against them , treat them as the terrorists that they are , and address the conditions that allow them to flourish .
The jihadists are seeking escalation in order to drive us into total confrontation .
If we have learned anything since 2001 , it is that we must not fall into their trap .
Address to the Kurdish Nation
ERBIL – By history and by language I am a member of a very old nation , one of the oldest in the world : France .
And in spirit I am a member of a very old people , the Jewish people – like the Kurds , one of the oldest on the planet , a people that founded one of the youngest states , Israel .
That is an experience that the Kurds are now preparing to replicate .
As a people , the Kurds have existed for a very long time .
They have lived through countless trials , endured innumerable twists of fate , suffered domination again and again .
But empires have crumbled ; tyrants have passed away ; and their executioners have fallen into the dustbins of history .
All the while , the Kurds have held fast , resisting the forces that wanted them to disappear .
And today , they are approaching a milestone : a declaration of self-determination in the form of a free state in which all citizens will be able to live in liberty , their heads held high .
The Kurdish nation was forged over centuries of pain and pride .
It was strengthened in the course of the war against Islamist terrorism , in which the Kurds have been the civilized world ’ s staunchest – and sometimes solitary – spearhead .
I know not one Peshmerga fighter who , while waging our common battle , did not have in mind the achievement of that ancestral dream of Kurdish independence .
Mosul will be liberated ; the Islamic State ( ISIS ) will be defeated ; and , when the moment comes for the referendum that Massoud Barzani , President of Iraq ’ s Kurdistan Regional Government , has described as the inalienable right of the Kurds , the will of each citizen will be shared by all .
Even the Kurds ’ closest allies worry that recognition of a Kurdish state might upset the regional balance and pose a threat to peace .
I believe that the contrary is true : the Kurds will be a pole of stability in a region increasingly susceptible to fanaticism and terror .
To their eternal credit , the Kurds have defended against all odds the standards – respect for borders , for the rule of law , and for the fundamental human rights of all – that underpin stability , and that tyrants from Saddam Hussein to Bashar al-Assad have flouted .
In a region where others create refugees , the Kurds provide a safe haven .
Indeed , the Kurds have forged one of the region ’ s few examples of a vibrant democracy that upholds tolerance , cultural coexistence , and the rule of law .
In what other part of the Muslim Middle East does one find such a strong belief in a geopolitical order that tends toward peace , not war ; favors reconciliation over ancient hatreds ; and prefers respect for the other to a war of civilizations ?
For these reasons , I believe very deeply that , in this stormy region , swept by so many ill winds , threatened by the worst of ideologies and by the violence that accompanies them , the rebirth of an independent Kurdish nation and state will mark an advance .
It will be an advance that helps to dispel from the region the terrible genies of disintegration , chaos , and bloody convulsion .
What kind of nation-state will the ancient Kurdish people make ?
It will be small – a nation of only several million – but that will not make it fragile or weak .
History offers many examples of what the writer Milan Kundera has called “ small nations ” that are solid and strong , because their people are united in the face of their powerful neighbors .
When it came time to defend the nation , the sword has always been close to the plow .
They are nations of citizens united by their history and spirit , rather than ethnicity , a sense of superiority , or an arrogant identity .
The Kurds are such a nation : a people of volunteers who know why they fight , a people who , from the humblest to the greatest , from the Peshmerga regular to the loftiest of Kurdish commanders , does not hesitate to take up arms to discourage or to dismantle despotism – and not only on their behalf .
They have been soldiers of freedom who kept Christians from being purged from the last place in the world where the language of Christ is still spoken , while defending the principle of equality of the sexes , even in combat – a principle that is the hallmark of great civilizations .
For all these reasons , I believe that a Kurdish nation-state will be a force for peace , not disorder , in the Middle East , a stormy region that is threatened by the worst of ideologies and by the violence that they beget .
I believe that the Kurds will build a strong and solid state that helps to return the awful genies of violent extremism , tyranny , and disintegration to their bottles .
Furthermore , this new Kurdish nation-state will be a safe haven and a shared home for a people that has been scattered by the cruelties of history .
It will help to unite a people long divided not just by scheming enemies , but also by deep disagreement over what it means to be a Kurd .
Like one of the world ’ s greatest nations – though one currently debased by those who purport to lead it – the Kurdish nation-state will be a “ shining city on a hill , ” a luminous lodestar for the lost sons and daughters of Kurdistan , and a source of hope for all of the world ’ s dispossessed and displaced .
As such , the Kurds should never be afraid to proclaim their vocation – a vocation which is both universal and , if the words have any meaning at all , truly internationalist .
The very voices of the Kurds embody this .
One thing that has struck me in the course of my frequent visits to Kurdistan is that the Kurds are a multilingual people .
In addition to Kurdish – their mother tongue , rich with ancient culture – they speak the languages acquired in exile .
Like the French nation , which was enriched over the centuries by immigrants and oppressed peoples , the Kurds are diverse in origin and cosmopolitan in outlook .
Their provision of refuge for persecuted Yezidi and Christian communities is further proof of this .
Today ’ s populist wreckers across the West deny it , but “ internationalism ” is a beautiful idea .
For two centuries , it has been the animating spirit of so many battles for freedom , and has inspired so much courage , resistance , sacrifice , and nobility , and so many beautiful writings .
Despite the traps into which it has sometimes fallen and become entangled , internationalism has nourished the best of what “ the West ” has represented .
One of Kurdistan ’ s merits is to have kept alive the flame of internationalism in a benighted region .
Reflect for a moment on the Kurds ’ battle against ISIS , which they have waged not only for themselves and their safety , but also on behalf of the rest of the world .
The Kurds have acted as internationalists , while also being internationalists in heart and soul .
So the Kurds will soon – very soon , I hope – be free , with their own independent nation-state .
But , after that , they will be surrounded by powerful neighbors that will , one expects , be hostile toward them – not least because of the precedent Kurdish independence sets .
Free Kurdistan will be a living reproach to the many false nations , anti-nations , and prison nations across the Middle East , in which Kurds , among others , remain confined .
Confronted with the new tests and challenges that are bound to stem from that reproach – challenges that independence alone will not suffice to surmount – the Kurdish people must recognize that they are likely to find themselves as alone as they have ever been in their long history .
Charles de Gaulle once said that a people has no friends , and , alas , the Kurds will find out soon enough that today ’ s friends will not always be their friends .
It may happen that they prefer their supposed world order to friendship , justice , and the cause of true stability and peace .
The Kurds are preparing for this .
And , fortunately , there are also millions of men and women abroad , in France and throughout the world , who believed in Kurdistan when governments wanted nothing to do with it .
That sort of friendship – the support offered by so many of the world ’ s citizens – is much more constant .
Friends like that will never fail .
A Death of One ’ s Own
PRINCETON – Dudley Clendinen , a writer and journalist , has amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) , a terminal degenerative illness .
In The New York Times earlier this year , he wrote movingly both of his current enjoyment of his life , and of his plan to end it when , as he put it , “ the music stops – when I can ’ t tie my bow tie , tell a funny story , walk my dog , talk with Whitney , kiss someone special , or tap out lines like this . ”
A friend told Clendinen that he needed to buy a gun .
In the United States , you can buy a gun and put a bullet through your brain without breaking any laws .
But if you are a law-abiding person who is already too ill to buy a gun , or to use one , or if shooting yourself doesn ’ t strike you as a peaceful and dignified way to end your life , or if you just don ’ t want to leave a mess for others to clean up , what are you to do ?
You can ’ t ask someone else to shoot you , and , in most countries , if you tell your doctor that you have had enough , and that you would like his or her assistance in dying , you are asking your doctor to commit a crime .
Last month , an expert panel of the Royal Society of Canada , chaired by Udo Schüklenk , a professor of bioethics at Queens University , released a report on decision-making at the end of life .
The report provides a strong argument for allowing doctors to help their patients to die , provided that the patients are competent and freely request such assistance .
The ethical basis of the panel ’ s argument is not so much the avoidance of unnecessary suffering in terminally ill patients , but rather the core value of individual autonomy or self-determination .
“ The manner of our dying , ” the panel concludes , “ reflects our sense of what is important just as much as do the other central decisions in our lives . ”
In a state that protects individual rights , therefore , deciding how to die ought to be recognized as such a right .
The report also offers an up-to-date review of how assistance by physicians in ending life is working in the “ living laboratories ” – the jurisdictions where it is legal .
In Switzerland , as well as in the US states of Oregon , Washington , and Montana , the law now permits physicians , on request , to supply a terminally ill patient with a prescription for a drug that will bring about a peaceful death .
In The Netherlands , Belgium , and Luxembourg , doctors have the additional option of responding to the patient ’ s request by giving the patient a lethal injection .
The panel examined reports from each of these jurisdictions , with the exception of Montana ( where legalization of assistance in dying occurred only in 2009 , and reliable data are not yet available ) .
In The Netherlands , voluntary euthanasia accounted for 1.7 % of all deaths in 2005 – exactly the same level as in 1990 .
Moreover , the frequency of ending a patient ’ s life without an explicit request from the patient fell by half during the same period , from 0.8 % to 0.4 % .
Indeed , several surveys suggest that ending a patient ’ s life without an explicit request is much more common in other countries , where patients cannot lawfully ask a doctor to end their lives .
In Belgium , although voluntary euthanasia rose from 1.1 % of all deaths in 1998 to 1.9 % in 2007 , the frequency of ending a patient ’ s life without an explicit request fell from 3.2 % to 1.8 % .
In Oregon , where the Death with Dignity Act has been in effect for 13 years , the annual number of physician-assisted deaths has yet to reach 100 per year , and the annual total in Washington is even lower .
The Canadian panel therefore concluded that there is strong evidence to rebut one of the greatest fears that opponents of voluntary euthanasia or physician-assisted dying often voice – that it is the first step down a slippery slope towards more widespread medical killing .
The panel also found inadequate several other objections to legalization , and recommended that the law in Canada be changed to permit both physician-assisted suicide and voluntary euthanasia .
Surveys show that more than two-thirds of Canadians support legalization of voluntary euthanasia – a level that has held steady for several decades .
So it is not surprising that the report received strong backing in the mainstream Canadian media .
What is more puzzling is the cool response from the country ’ s political parties , none of which indicated a willingness to support law reform in this area .
There is a similar contrast between public opinion and political ( in ) action elsewhere , including the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand , and several continental European countries .
Why , when it comes to dying , do democratic institutions so often fail to translate what people want into legislation ?
I suspect that , above all , mainstream politicians fear religious institutions that oppose voluntary euthanasia , even though individual believers often do not follow their religious leaders ’ views .
Polls in various countries have shown that a majority of Roman Catholics , for example , support legalization of voluntary euthanasia .
Even in strongly Catholic Poland , more people now support legalization than oppose it .
In any case , the religious beliefs of a minority should not deny individuals like Dudley Clendinen the right to end their lives in the manner of their own choosing .
The Development Costs of Homophobia
LONDON – As a gay man living in Nigeria , my biggest challenge was choosing between my sexuality and my job .
In 2004 , I was at the start of my acting career .
I had just left university , and I was featured in “ Roses and Thorns , ” a prime-time soap opera on Galaxy Television , one of Nigeria ’ s most popular TV stations .
I was playing the role of “ Richard , ” the only son of a rich family who was having an affair with the house maid .
Whispers were making the rounds about my private life , and I decided it was time to come out .
So I agreed to go on Nigeria ’ s most-watched television talk show to discuss my sexuality .
Almost immediately , my character was eliminated .
And when my job disappeared , so did my financial security .
Like many gay men and lesbians in Africa , my choice was between economic freedom and mental imprisonment .
This year , Nigeria and Uganda put in place draconian anti-gay laws , sparking a worldwide debate about human rights .
This debate has also started at the World Bank , whose president , Jim Yong Kim , recently declared that “ institutionalized discrimination is bad for people and for societies . ”
Kim ’ s statement has invited criticism and controversy .
Often , as in Uganda and Nigeria , we hear the claim that opposition to official discrimination against gay , lesbian , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) people is simply a way to impose “ Western ” values on Africa .
But this assumes that homosexuality is “ un-African . ”
And , despite the absence of evidence that any given country or continent does not have LGBT people ( and ample evidence to the contrary ) , it is an assumption that an increasing number of African leaders have embraced .
In 2006 , President Olusegun Obasanjo , then Nigeria ’ s president , was among the first to do so .
Uganda ’ s President Yoweri Museveni followed suit when signing the anti-gay bill into law in 2014 .
Other leaders , from Gambia ’ s President Yahya Jammeh to Zimbabwe ’ s Robert Mugabe , have spoken in the same vein .
These official attitudes have caused significant suffering for Africa ’ s gays and lesbians .
Indeed , the price of homophobia for gay people in many African countries is painfully clear : legal penalties , social ostracism , and mob justice .
But here is what Africa ’ s anti-gay leaders miss : legal protections are not only a human-rights issue , but also an economic issue .
Kim is exactly right , and research has started measuring the economic costs of homophobia by exploring links between anti-gay sentiment and poverty in countries where laws and social attitudes proscribe same-sex relationships .
M.V. Lee Badgett , an economist at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst , presented the initial findings of a study of the economic implications of homophobia in India at a World Bank meeting in March 2014 .
Badgett estimated that the Indian economy may have lost up to $ 23.1 billion in 2012 in direct health costs alone , owing to depression , suicide , and HIV treatment disparities caused by anti-gay stigma and discrimination .
In addition to such concrete costs , being gay can bring violence , job loss , family rejection , harassment in schools , and pressure to marry .
As a result , many gay people have less education , lower productivity , lower earnings , poorer health , and a shorter life expectancy .
In Nigeria , I started the Independent Project for Equal Rights ( TIERs ) in 2005 to respond to the increasing number of people who were losing their jobs because of suspicions about their sexuality .
During our first year , we provided support for dozens of people .
One young man , “ Olumide , ” was given temporary housing after his family kicked him out for being gay .
Another , “ Uche , ” was fired from his job as a chef after his sexuality was revealed .
TIERs helped him with accommodation and capital to set up a catering business .
Though almost 10 years have passed , it is still not safe to use their real names .
Across Africa , the economic costs of discrimination are increasing , in line with growing pressure on employers , landlords , health-care providers , educational institutions , and others to exclude LGBT people .
Today , the World Bank and other development agencies are mapping out the global development priorities that will follow the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , which officially end in 2015 and included specific targets for promoting gender equality and empowering women as a strategy for economic growth .
Looking ahead , the Bank should take the same approach to LGBT rights and make legal protections for sexual orientation and gender identity a condition for countries receiving loans .
Building recognition of women ’ s rights into the MDGs did not corrupt African cultures by imposing “ Western ” values ; in fact , it strengthened many African countries , which now lead the world in the representation of women in government .
By pursuing similar protections for LGBT people , international investment and aid can improve economic performance and strengthen respect for basic human rights .
The World Bank , always wary of entangling itself in “ political ” questions , emphasizes that it is not a global human-rights enforcer .
But it also increasingly recognizes its own role as a facilitator in helping Bank members realize their human-rights obligations .
LGBT rights should be a test case .
Aid to governments that permit specific social groups to be ostracized can carry very real economic costs .
As new loans are considered , steps should be taken to ensure that the benefits are as inclusive as possible .
If the Bank – which currently lends Nigeria almost $ 5.5 billion and expects to commit an additional $ 2 billion in each of the next four years – moved in this direction , other funders might follow .
Africa ’ s LGBT people desperately need such powerful allies in their struggle for human and economic rights .
A Decade of Hugo Chávez
SAN JOSE – We should have known that something was amiss when , during President Hugo Chávez ’ s inauguration on February 2 , 1999 , he swore on Venezuela ’ s 40-year-old Constitution by declaring it “ moribund . ”
Under “ the moribund , ” as the Constitution came to be known , Venezuela not only had eight peaceful presidential transitions , but also enjoyed the fruits of democratic pluralism and strong civil and political liberties .
Of course , during this period Venezuela produced as much corruption and political irresponsibility as it did barrels of oil .
Nonetheless , Venezuela fared far better than the average Latin American country .
It wasn ’ t Switzerland , but , by anyone ’ s measure , it was a genuine democracy .
Not anymore .
Elections are still held , but the legacy of Chávez ’ s decade in power consists , first and foremost , in the demolition of democratic institutions .
Elected in a landslide to clean up the political vices of the previous establishment , Chávez chose to throw the baby out with the bathwater .
The previous regime , including its system of checks and balances and its tradition of political tolerance , did disappear , but its vices – particularly graft and demagoguery – became worse than ever .
Pretty much like 10 years ago , Venezuela , once a destination for immigrants from around the world , remains under-developed .
More fundamentally , Chávez represents ideas that have long stifled Latin America ’ s political and economic growth .
This includes the notion that social justice can be achieved only by abandoning the path of reform and rejecting “ bourgeois ” democratic forms in favor of “ real ” democracy , born of revolutionary purity and the leader ’ s millenarian dreams .
That ’ s simply false .
Though the Chávez revolution has made progress against poverty and inequality , it is hardly sustainable and reeks of patronage .
In fact , one can find similar achievements in Chile and Brazil , which have not given up on democratic checks and balances , political pluralism , or freedom of the press , and have not enjoyed the luxury of $ 300 billion in oil revenue in the space of one decade .
Moreover , it ought not to be forgotten that between 1950 and 1980 , Venezuela itself reduced extreme poverty from 43 % to 8 % of the population , one of the lowest figures in Latin America .
It did so with democracy and freedom .
Chávez also repeats , ad nauseam , the idea that others are to blame for Latin America ’ s ills .
This is the pernicious victimization narrative – still very popular in universities across Latin America – the late Venezuelan journalist Carlos Rangel eloquently refuted in books such as The Third World Ideology .
It is obvious that Yankee imperialism cannot be blamed for Venezuela ’ s emaciated tax system , dismally bad schools , rampant corruption , high crime rate , and feeble political institutions .
In all of these areas , Venezuela is faring poorly even by Latin America ’ s low standards .
This is particularly true in the case of institutional weakness .
When Chávez declares “ moribund ” a legitimate constitution , or when he proclaims l ’ état c ’ est moi by declaring a national holiday to commemorate his 10 years in power , we see eloquent examples of a homemade institutional farce that would doom any country to the ninth circle of misery .
None of these ideas would fly , of course , in a contented nation .
In this sense , Venezuela ’ s experience speaks to all of Latin America .
The combination of economic growth ( now in reverse because of the global crisis ) and atrocious levels of inequality and social segmentation will continue to breed the same unmet expectations and social resentment that cleared Chávez ’ s path to power .
As long as Latin America ’ s democracies fail to take seriously the tasks of reducing inequality , spreading opportunity , and nurturing more cohesive societies , they will continue to court disaster .
To avoid this outcome , it is vital to purge certain reactionary and numbing beliefs , including the idea that reducing poverty obviates the need to address inequality , or that development is possible without introducing modern and progressive tax systems .
If the tenth anniversary of Chávez ’ s tenure can serve as a reminder of the perils that beset unjust democracies – especially now that a new electoral cycle in Latin America looms – then Venezuela ’ s agonizing recent history would , at least , be redeemed .
A Declaration of America &apos;s Interdependence
PRAGUE : Many Americans seem overwhelmed by the feeling that , because the Soviet Empire collapsed , the dangers of war can be crossed off the list of potential risks .
America , they say , should pay attention to its own problems , and should not get involved in a world where its attempts to do good are rewarded with ingratitude .
Isolationism has a long tradition in America ; it returns in fits and differing forms .
Never in modern times , however , has isolationism protected America from danger ; instead it delays engagement when conflagrations are ablaze .
Eventually , America pays a thousand times more for its initial lack of interest than it would have paid had it become engaged at the outset of crisis or , better yet , even before .
Americans pay for short-sightedness not only in larger expenditures , but with lives wasted unnecessarily .
So isolationism is shortsighted and never pays off .
This is all the more true when defense of the values that America stands for is more difficult now than before .
Previously , the enemy was solitary , armed to the teeth , and quite predictable .
The threats looming over today &apos;s world , however , are to the threat of communism as metastasis is to an isolated tumor .
For the world is awash in dangers that are diverse , decentralized ( yet intertwined ) , and difficult to predict .
I believe that across the globe , America is a symbolic concentration of all the good and bad within our civilization -- from the fantastic development of science and technology , to civil liberty and strong democratic institutions , to the cult of perpetual economic growth and never-ending consumption , to the dictates of materialism and the voiding of human uniqueness by the uniformity of the round-the-clock noise of TV banality .
For these reasons , the ways in which America assumes its global responsibilities must embody those premises that alone may save civilization as a whole : this way should be imbued with a new spirituality , a new ethos and new ethics ; exactly with the things that should be adopted by all cultures , all spheres of civilization and all nations of today &apos;s world as a condition of their survival .
What does this mean in concrete terms ?
For one thing , a respect for and understanding of the positive values inherent in other cultures .
It also requires the courage to step out of the world of pragmatic power and defend -- non-violently -- truth and justice wherever they are violated , whether or not profitable commercial contracts are placed at risk .
As for security matters , I believe that in cases that are beyond any doubt , America , while enjoying the general support of freedom-loving people and peaceful democracies , must have the strength to intervene with force -- that is by military means -- against evil .
The United States cannot and must not give up this obligation , which is a very specific and extreme manifestation of its responsibility for the world .
In the course of the Cold War America understood this , though historians argue about the situations in which it tested its competence , or the means it employed .
It seems to me that after all the good and bad experiences America has had in the 20th century , it should understand that the most effective , most ethical , and in the end , the least expensive way of dealing with these challenges is to invest all its intellectual potential and a significant share of its material strength into what I call &quot; security prevention &quot; .
Of course : to predict and avert conflicts is more difficult than to engage and win them .
Enlarging the North Atlantic Alliance is part of America &apos;s reckoning with its destiny .
Some Americans now maintain that NATO enlargement makes no sense .
Why take in countries that were part of the Communist Empire , and therefore somewhat suspect , they say , when the West faces no serious threats ?
Furthermore , NATO enlargement might allegedly be resented by a certain large Euro-Asian state and would cost taxpayers money .
Such thoughts -- after all we have endured in the 20th century , when more than 200 million people died in wars and oncentration camps -- are naive , short-sighted , even dangerous .
Europe is a strange continent .
Today &apos;s civilization was born within it but so were two World Wars .
For the first time in its history , Europe has a chance to establish its internal order on the principle of cooperation and equality of the large and the small , the strong and the weak , on shared democratic values .
This is also a chance , once and for all , to put an end to the export of wars and coercion , and to become an example of peaceful collaboration .
Should Europe miss this chance , we might head for a new global catastrophe , even graver than previous ones .
For reasons I have described , this time the forces of freedom would not be facing one totalitarian enemy .
Here would be a strange war of all against all , war with no clear-cut fronts ; war difficult to distinguish from terrorism , genocide , and organized crime ; war into which the whole world would be dragged by a myriad of indirect and hidden means .
I don &apos;t mean to frighten , but anybody with a little imagination and some knowledge of what has recently been going on -- for example , in Bosnia- Herzegovina -- must understand that this is not empty talk .
If the ongoing process of European integration were to stop at the gates of today &apos;s NATO , the consequences of such a rupture , regardless of the form it assumes , and regardless of whether they befall us in three years or fifteen , could cost much more than the two World Wars Europe &quot; donated &quot; in this century combined .
After prolonged hesitation , the West took a step to avoid this threat in Madrid not long ago when it invited three former communist countries to join NATO .
But this was the beginning , not the end .
Any judicious person must admit that the cost is worthwhile , for the costliest preventive security is cheaper than the cheapest war .
A Declaration of Independence from the US
George W. Bush is obsessed with the war on terrorism , especially with the military response to terrorism .
American foreign policy reflects that obsession .
This year , the US will spend around $ 450 billion for the military , including the costs of the Iraq War , while it will spend no more than $ 15 billion to overcome global poverty , global environmental degradation , and global diseases .
In other words , US foreign policy spending is thirty times more focused on the military than on building global prosperity , global public health , and a sustainable environment .
Throughout 2003 , the world lived with Bush &apos;s obsession .
Debate over Iraq dominated international diplomacy , and took up almost the entire UN agenda .
The war in Iraq cost countless innocent lives , such as when the UN headquarters in Baghdad was bombed .
At the same time , Bush &apos;s emphasis on a one-dimensional , militarized approach to global problems has fueled unrest and instability throughout the Islamic world , leading to increased terrorism in Turkey , North Africa , Saudi Arabia , and Southeast Asia .
The nature of suffering around the world hardly justifies this narrow strategy .
Focusing on terrorism to the exclusion of other issues , and emphasizing the military response to it , will not bring prosperity and peace , or even a significant reduction in the number of attacks .
While 3,000 innocent people died in the US on September 11 , 2001 , in Africa 8,000 innocent children die every day from malaria .
Yet malaria is preventable and treatable .
The problem is that most of Africa is too poor to mobilize the methods of prevention ( bed nets ) and treatments ( anti-malarial medicines ) that could save millions of children every year .
The US spends more on Iraq each day than it does on Africa &apos;s malaria in a year .
As 2003 draws to a close , it is time for world leaders to help guide the world away from the obsessive , failing approach of America &apos;s government .
President Bush should be made to understand that the US will find no true international support if America speaks incessantly about terrorism while doing almost nothing about the problems that really affect most of the world : poverty , lack of access to safe water and sanitation , vulnerability to disease , and climate change .
Ironically , President Bush claims that the UN does not follow through on its word .
He declared in London recently that &quot; the credibility of the UN depends on a willingness to keep its word and to act when action is required . &quot;
Yet the US repeatedly violates its own UN pledges .
For example , at the International Conference on Financing for Development , in Monterrey , Mexico in March 2002 , America signed the Monterrey Consensus , which includes a promise by rich countries to raise their development assistance towards 0.7 % of national income .
That would bring an additional $ 60 billion per year in foreign assistance from the US--approximately what it spent on Iraq this year .
Yet President Bush has simply ignored this promise .
There are many other similar commitments that the US has made in recent years to the UN that remain utterly unfulfilled .
The US promised action to fight man-made climate change as a signatory to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCC ) in 1992 .
It has so far failed to act .
America also promised--in the Doha Declaration in 2001--to open its markets to the world &apos;s poorest countries .
Yet at Cancun , Mexico earlier this summer , it refused to open its markets even to exports from struggling African economies .
The list goes on and on .
At the Millennium Assembly in 2000 , the US promised to pursue reduction of global poverty , yet it has taken few steps in that direction .
At the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg in 2002 , America committed itself to protect global ecosystems , yet little has been seen or heard from US policy makers on this issue since then .
America is certainly not alone in failing to promote the international goals adopted in the UN .
But because the US is the richest , most powerful country in the world , its neglect is devastating .
If the US really wants to undercut terrorism , it must recognize the interconnectedness of extremism , poverty , and environmental degradation , and it will need to understand the struggles for survival that are underway among the poor everywhere .
But the world should not wait for the America to come to its senses .
The US represents just 5 % of the world &apos;s population , and just one vote of 191 countries in the UN General Assembly .
Poor countries , especially the democracies of the developing world--Brazil , South Africa , India , Mexico , Ghana , the Philippines--should say , &quot; We need to act on the issues that concern us , not just on the issues that concern the US . &quot;
What the world needs most in 2004 is a declaration of independence from American willfulness .
A De-Globalized World ?
Cambridge – It may take a few months or a couple of years , but one way or another the United States and other advanced economies will eventually recover from today ’ s crisis .
The world economy , however , is unlikely to look the same .
Even with the worst of the crisis over , we are likely to find ourselves in a somewhat de-globalized world , one in which international trade grows at a slower pace , there is less external finance , and rich countries ’ appetite for running large current-account deficits is significantly diminished .
Will this spell doom for developing countries ?
Not necesarily .
Growth in the developing world tends to come in three distinct variants .
First comes growth driven by foreign borrowing .
Second is growth as a by-product of commodity booms .
Third is growth led by economic restructuring and diversification into new products .
The first two models are at greater risk than the third .
But we should not lose sleep over them , because they are flawed and ultimately unsustainable .
What should be of greater concern is the potential plight of countries in the last group .
These countries will need to undertake major changes in their policies to adjust to today ’ s new realities .
The first two growth models invariably come to a bad end .
Foreign borrowing can enable consumers and governments to live beyond their means for a while , but reliance on foreign capital is an unwise strategy .
The problem is not only that foreign capital flows can easily reverse direction , but also that they produce the wrong kind of growth , based on overvalued currencies and investments in non-traded goods and services , such as housing and construction .
Growth driven by high commodity prices is also susceptible to busts , for similar reasons . Commodity prices tend to move in cycles .
When they are high , they are apt to crowd out investments in manufactures and other , non-traditional tradables .
Moreover , commodity booms frequently produce ugly politics in countries with weak institutions , leading to costly struggles for resource rents , which are rarely invested wisely .
So it is no surprise that the countries that have produced steady , long-term growth during the last six decades are those that relied on a different strategy : promoting diversification into manufactured and other “ modern ” goods .
By capturing a growing share of world markets for manufactures and other non-primary products , these countries increased their domestic employment opportunities in high-productivity activities .
Their governments pursued not just good “ fundamentals ” ( e.g. , macroeconomic stability and an outward orientation ) , but also what might be called “ productivist ” policies : undervalued currencies , industrial policies , and financial controls .
China exemplified this approach .
Its growth was fueled by an extraordinarily rapid structural transformation towards an increasingly sophisticated set of industrial goods .
In recent years , China also got hooked on a large trade surplus vis-à-vis the US – the counterpart of its undervalued currency .
But it wasn ’ t just China .
Countries that had been growing rapidly in the run-up to the great crash of 2008 typically had trade surpluses ( or very small deficits ) .
These countries did not want to be recipients of capital inflows , because they realized that this would wreak havoc with their need to maintain competitive currencies .
It is now part of conventional wisdom that large external balances – typified by the bilateral US-China trade relationship – played a major contributing role in the great crash .
Global macroeconomic stability requires that we avoid such large current-account imbalances in the future .
But a return to high growth in developing countries requires that they resume their push into tradable goods and services .
In the past , this push was accommodated by the willingness of the US and a few other developed nations to run large trade deficits .
This is no longer a feasible strategy for large or middle-income developing countries .
So , are the requirements of global macroeconomic stability and of growth for developing countries at odds with each other ?
Will developing countries ’ need to generate large increases in the supply of industrial products inevitably clash with the world ’ s intolerance of trade imbalances ?
There is in fact no inherent conflict , once we understand that what matters for growth in developing countries is not the size of their trade surpluses , nor even the volume of their exports .
What matters is their output of modern industrial goods ( and services ) , which can expand without limit as long as domestic demand expands simultaneously .
Maintaining an undervalued currency has the upside that it subsidizes the production of such goods ; but it also has the downside that it taxes domestic consumption – which is why it generates a trade surplus .
By encouraging industrial production directly , it is possible to have the upside without the downside .
There are many ways that this can be done , including reducing the cost of domestic inputs and services through targeted investments in infrastructure .
Explicit industrial policies can be an even more potent instrument .
The key point is that developing countries that are concerned about the competitiveness of their modern sectors can afford to allow their currencies to appreciate ( in real terms ) as long as they have access to alternative policies that promote industrial activities more directly .
So the good news is that developing countries can continue to grow rapidly even if world trade slows in and there is reduced appetite for capital flows and trade imbalances .
Their growth potential need not be severely affected as long as the implications of this new world for domestic and international policies are understood .
One such implication is that developing countries will have to substitute real industrial policies for those that operate through the exchange rate .
Another is that external policy actors ( for example , the World Trade Organization ) will have to be more tolerant of these policies as long as the effects on trade balances are neutralized through appropriate adjustments in the real exchange rate .
Greater use of industrial policies is the price to be paid for a reduction of macroeconomic imbalances .
A Democratic Burma ?
TOKYO – Historic transformations often happen when least expected .
Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union emerged at one of the Cold War ’ s darkest hours , with US President Ronald Reagan pushing for strategic missile defense and the two sides fighting proxy wars in Afghanistan and elsewhere .
Deng Xiaoping ’ s economic opening followed China ’ s bloody – and failed – invasion of Vietnam in 1978 .
And South Africa ’ s last apartheid leader , F. W. de Klerk , was initially perceived as just another apologist for the system – hardly the man to free Nelson Mandela and oversee the end of white minority rule .
Now the world is suddenly asking whether Burma ( Myanmar ) , after six decades of military dictatorship , has embarked on a genuine political transition that could end the country ’ s pariah status .
Is Burma , like South Africa under de Klerk , truly poised to emerge from a half-century of self-imposed isolation ?
And can Aung San Suu Kyi , the heroic opposition leader , and Thein Sein , Burma ’ s new president , engineer a political transition as skillfully and peacefully as Mandela and de Klerk did for South Africa in the early 1990 ’ s ?
Despite her two decades of house arrest and isolation , Suu Kyi possesses two of the gifts that enabled Mandela to carry out his great task : a reassuring serenity and an utter lack of vindictiveness .
As Burma ’ s authorities test reform , these gifts , together with her negotiating skills and , most of all , her vast moral authority , will be tested as never before .
Moreover , unlike Mandela during his 27-year imprisonment , Suu Kyi has had her hopes raised – and dashed – before .
In the mid-1990 ’ s , and again in 2002-2003 , reconciliation between Suu Kyi ’ s National League for Democracy ( NLD ) and the military junta seemed to be in the offing .
On both occasions , however , the regime ’ s hardliners gained the upper hand , crushing prospects for reform .
Yet Suu Kyi , and much of the Burmese opposition , is beginning to admit that today ’ s political liberalization might be the real thing .
Because Burma ’ s generals say almost nothing in public , it is difficult to fathom why they allowed elections that elevated Thein Sein to power , or to explain their willingness to embrace dialogue with the long-suppressed opposition .
Recent events suggest one possible explanation : Burma ’ s rulers have grown wary of China ’ s almost smothering embrace – a result of the country ’ s international isolation .
Indeed , public protests against China ’ s commercial exploitation of Burma ’ s natural resources became so widespread that the government called a halt to construction by Chinese investors on the huge and environmentally damaging Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy River .
Thein Sein ’ s decision to halt the project is clearly an important policy shift .
It is also a signal to the outside world that Burma ’ s new government may be much more willing than any of its predecessors to heed both public pressure and international opinion , both of which vehemently opposed the dam ’ s construction .
Almost simultaneously , Thein Sein offered even stronger signals that his was a very different Burmese administration : he freed political prisoners and invited Suu Kyi for direct talks with him .
Indeed , Suu Kyi now enjoys far greater freedom of movement than she has at any time since she received the Nobel Peace Prize 20 years ago , and the NLD recently announced that it will field candidates in the forthcoming by-elections to the country ’ s newly established parliament .
If Suu Kyi is permitted to campaign free of restraint , for both her own seat and to boost the electoral chances of her NLD colleagues , it will be clear that Thein Sein and his government are truly determined to bring their country in from the cold .
For both Suu Kyi and Thein Sein , every step from now on will be delicate , to be calibrated with the same care and deliberation that Mandela and de Klerk used in bridging their differences and leading their country out of isolation .
But the international community , too , must act with great care .
While Thein Sein would undoubtedly wish to see the myriad economic and political sanctions imposed on Burma quickly lifted , it is too soon for a general easing of such measures .
But the outside world should demonstrate that every clear move toward greater political openness will merit more international political and economic engagement .
The Japan Investment Bank ’ s decision to invest in port development in Burma – essential if the economy , too , is to be opened – is one positive sign that the world will keep pace with Thein Sein step for step .
And US President Barack Obama ’ s decision to send Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Burma to meet Thein Sein is another clear sign that the world is ready to end the country ’ s isolation .
Closer to home , ASEAN ’ s recent decision to give Burma a chance to chair the organization in 2014 underscores its neighbors ’ desire for the country ’ s full participation in Asia ’ s growing prosperity .
No one should rush to judgment yet , but Thein Sein ’ s decisions , at least so far , are beginning to resemble those of South Africa ’ s de Klerk when he initiated his country ’ s reform process .
Fortunately , Burma already has in Aung San Suu Kyi its very own Nelson Mandela .
A Democratic Windfall for Turkey ?
Turkey &apos;s seeming fall from grace with the US may turn out to be a blessing in disguise .
The Iraq war and the tortured diplomacy that led up to it may help resolve Turkey &apos;s conflict between its &quot; strategic alliance &quot; with America and its drive to join the EU .
The elections last November that brought the Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) to power were preceded by a dispute between the members of the then-ruling coalition over enacting the reforms demanded by the EU .
Some liberal elements of that &quot; secular &quot; coalition resigned from the government and joined with the Islamists to push the reforms through parliament .
After coming to power , the AKP &apos;s leaders , former Islamists who had reinvented themselves as &quot; conservative democrats , &quot; energetically engaged with the US , the EU , and the UN on issues ranging from Cyprus to Iraq , from Kurdish language rights to other human rights issues within Turkey .
Having suffered the oppressive practices of Turkey &apos;s &quot; secular &quot; state and recognizing that human rights must be protected across-the-board , the AKP emerged as a credible interlocutor with the West .
The US , preoccupied with the supposed specter of a &quot; clash of civilizations &quot; between Islam and the West , saw the AKP &apos;s modern , westernized face as an opportunity and urged the EU to admit Turkey .
Today , both &quot; conservative democrats &quot; and liberals advocate passing all the reforms needed to gain accession to the EU , while opponents include extreme nationalists , of both left and right , as well as some elements of the &quot; secular &quot; establishment .
The Europeans could have tipped the balance decisively in favor of the reformers by finally rewarding the efforts of the pro-EU Turks at last December &apos;s summit of EU leaders .
Instead , the EU kept Turkey waiting yet again , putting off formal negotiations that , in any case , may take years to complete .
Europe &apos;s persistent reluctance puts the Turks in a quandary .
The Americans want full EU membership for Turkey--a longstanding NATO member and close American ally--while Europeans complain about the Turkish military &apos;s domestic political role .
The paradox is that , by maintaining a political distance and thus limiting Turkey &apos;s options , Europe may end up reinforcing Turkey &apos;s status as a military outpost of the US .
At least , that was how things were shaping up prior to the war in Iraq .
Then , despite massive US pressure , Turkey &apos;s parliament unexpectedly rejected the government &apos;s proposal to allow US troops in Turkey to launch an invasion from Turkish territory .
Turkey &apos;s refusal to grant the Americans access to military bases on its territory effectively ruled out a northern front in the war .
The Turkish government even attempted a regional initiative for a peaceful solution to the crisis , an effort no current EU member could have contemplated .
Parliament &apos;s rejection of US troops powerfully refutes suggestions that Turkey was primarily concerned about the size of the American aid package on offer as an inducement to cooperate .
Suggestions that characterized the vote as revealing the government &apos;s true &quot; Islamic &quot; character ignore the fact that the only opposition party in parliament , the Republican People &apos;s Party--founded by Atatürk and still fully &quot; secularist &quot; --voted against the plan .
Likewise , other elements of Turkey &apos;s secular establishment , including the President and the military leadership , either opposed or were lukewarm , at best , to the idea of war in Iraq .
Turkey &apos;s military initially remained silent on the issue , uncharacteristically watching the civilian political process unfold .
By contrast , the military had earlier publicly criticized AKP initiatives on Cyprus .
Their silence on Iraq reflected their apprehension about unwanted alternatives : either support the US plan and risk encouraging Kurdish moves toward an independent state , or oppose the Americans and jeopardize a critical strategic relationship .
They chose to defer to the civilian leadership and to parliament , which , in voting down the US plan , reflected overwhelming public sentiment against the war .
Only after the vote did the Chief of Staff publicly endorse the original proposal to bring in American troops .
In fact , the allegedly Islamic party had skilfully managed to negotiate with an unrelenting US , consult with the Turkish military and President , and share all information with the public and parliament .
Walking a fine line in what was essentially a lose-lose situation , the party leadership laid out the stakes clearly and judiciously left the final decision to parliament .
The outcome was a victory for Turkish democracy and recognized as such internationally .
After the US military action in Iraq , the tables may be turning in surprising ways .
As America establishes itself in Iraq , Turkey &apos;s geopolitical military significance may decline .
Yet the declared American aim of building a Muslim democracy in Iraq will only enhance Turkey &apos;s symbolic importance as a role model .
This shift in Turkey &apos;s strategic role may also be reflected in a new domestic balance between the military and the forces pushing for reform .
With careful management , Turkey may find itself drawing closer to Europe , while rebuilding its relationship with America .
A Devaluation Option for Southern Europe
CAMBRIDGE – This year is likely to mark a make-or-break ordeal for the euro .
The eurozone ’ s survival demands a credible solution to its long-running sovereign-debt crisis , which in turn requires addressing the two macroeconomic imbalances – external and fiscal – which are at the heart of that crisis .
The crisis has exposed the deep disparities in competitiveness that have developed within the eurozone .
From 1996 to 2010 , unit labor costs in Germany increased by just 8 % , and by 13 % in France .
Compare that to 24 % in Portugal , 35 % in Spain , 37 % in Italy , and a whopping 59 % in Greece .
The result has been large trade imbalances between eurozone countries , a problem compounded by large fiscal deficits and high levels of public debt in southern Europe ( and France ) – much of it owed to foreign creditors .
Does addressing these imbalances require breaking up the eurozone ?
Suppose , for example , that Portugal were to leave and re-introduce the escudo .
The ensuing exchange-rate devaluation would immediately lower the price of Portugal ’ s exports , raise its import prices , stimulate the economy , and bring about much-needed growth .
But a euro exit would be a messy affair .
The resulting turmoil could very well trump any short-term gains in competitiveness from devaluation .
There is a remarkably simple alternative that does not require southern Europe ’ s troubled economies to abandon the euro and devalue their exchange rates .
It involves increasing the value-added tax while cutting payroll taxes .
Our recent research demonstrates that such a “ fiscal devaluation ” has very similar effects on the economy in terms of its impact on GDP , consumption , employment , and inflation .
A currency devaluation works by making imports more costly and exports cheaper .
A VAT / payroll-tax swap would do exactly the same thing .
An increase in VAT raises the price of imported goods , as foreign firms face a higher tax .
To ensure that domestic firms do not have an incentive to raise prices , an increase in VAT needs to be accompanied by a cut in payroll taxes .
Moreover , since exports are exempt from VAT , the price of domestic exports will fall .
The desired competitiveness effects of exchange-rate devaluation can thus be had while staying in the euro .
This policy can also help on the fiscal front .
As is true of an exchange-rate devaluation , the positive impact on growth of an increase in competitiveness can strengthen the fiscal position by raising tax revenues .
Moreover , an important advantage of fiscal devaluations is that they generate additional revenues in proportion to the country ’ s trade deficit .
For countries that are suffering from weak competitiveness and , as a consequence , running trade deficits , this typically means more revenues , especially in the short run .
Like exchange-rate devaluations , fiscal devaluations create winners and losers .
Both act as a wealth levy : inflation means that bondholders suffer a real loss in proportion to their wealth and the size of the devaluation .
If taxes on capital are not adjusted , holders of domestic stocks suffer a comparable loss .
By contrast , many transfers , such as unemployment benefits , health benefits , and public pensions , are indexed to inflation , and thus maintain their real value .
The same is true of minimum wages .
These distributive effects play an important role in the politics of exchange-rate devaluations , and most of these effects appear in fiscal devaluations as well .
Fiscal devaluations already have some advocates .
Indeed , French President Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s government just announced one .
And concerns that a fiscal devaluation will conflict with euro rules can be met by simply pointing out that Germany ’ s government carried one out in 2007 , though by another name , when it raised VAT from 16 % to 19 % and cut employers ’ contribution to social insurance , from 6.5 % to 4.2 % .
In short , there are simple fiscal alternatives to exchange-rate devaluation that can address southern Europe ’ s short-term competitiveness problems .
To be sure , feasible fiscal devaluations would be limited in size .
But , together with debt restructuring , accommodative monetary policy , liquidity support from the European Central Bank , and much-required structural reforms , they can help to put these troubled economies on a sound footing without a euro breakup or a major austerity-induced recession .
A Dim Light on Global Warming
COPENHAGEN – Amid a growing wave of concern about climate change , many countries – including Brazil , Australia , the United States , and the members of the European Union – passed laws in the 2000 ’ s outlawing or severely restricting access to incandescent light bulbs .
The intention was understandable : if everyone in the world exchanged most light bulbs for energy-efficient compact fluorescent light bulbs ( CFLs ) , we could save 3.5 % of all electricity , or 1 % of our CO2 emissions .
The current attempt by Republicans in the US Congress to roll back America ’ s effort to ban incandescent bulbs has revived this discussion .
Many contend that the agenda is being driven by knuckle-dragging climate-change deniers .
But it ’ s worth taking a closer look at the premise that banning things is the smartest way to tackle global warming .
Let ’ s be clear : we do need to tackle climate change .
But this does not mean that we should just cut all emissions .
Burning fossil fuels also has significant benefits , and we should weigh those benefits against the costs .
A tax on carbon should be equivalent to its damage .
The best estimate of this is about $ 7 / ton of CO2 or $ 0.06 / gallon of gasoline ( € 0.015 / liter ) .
Most developed countries already have a tax of this size ( and often much larger ) on electricity and fossil fuels , although this also incorporates the costs of air pollution and supply insecurity .
While CFLs are more expensive to buy , they are much cheaper over their lifespan , because they use much less energy ( even more so with the cost of CO2 factored into taxes on electricity ) .
Thus , on a straightforward cost-benefit basis , it seems to make sense for most people to switch from incandescent bulbs to the new , greener technology .
This is what is great about technological solutions to climate change : if an alternative option is cheaper , people will start using it .
My household uses CFLs , and I enjoy knowing that I am causing fewer CO2 emissions and spending less money .
Why , then , is it even necessary to outlaw the old bulbs ?
The reason is that monetary cost is only one factor .
Many people find it annoying that CFLs take time to “ warm up . ”
Or they believe that their light is “ funny . ”
Or they worry that the bulbs can spread poisonous mercury if they break .
For some people , energy-efficient bulbs can trigger epileptic seizures and migraines .
The up-front cost is a factor , too , especially for those on low budgets .
And in places where lights are not used very often , a lower-price incandescent bulb can cost less overall than the energy-efficient alternative .
You might imagine that people could choose the right light bulbs for themselves .
But proponents of phasing out access to incandescent bulbs argue that they know better .
As US Energy Secretary Steven Chu put it recently , “ We are taking away a choice that continues to let people waste their own money . ”
Setting aside other possible objections to this view , there is the problem that it presumes that all incandescent bulbs are worth less than $ 7 / ton of CO2 .
This is clearly not true for those who suffer from migraines or epileptic seizures because of the new bulbs , or for those who are seriously worried about mercury , or for those who have other reasons for preferring incandescent bulbs .
The solution should be to focus on improving the technology – making the lights safer , brighter , warm up faster , and save more energy , so that more people will replace more of their lights .
But it is not just light bulbs that policymakers have tried to ban .
EU parliamentarians voted overwhelmingly to outlaw patio heaters , which one MEP declared to be “ a luxury the planet cannot afford . ”
Who decides when something is luxurious ?
And where does this end ?
Should we outlaw air conditioning or television satellite boxes because some people find them luxurious ?
Should we ban private cars wherever public transport is available to move us from A to B with fewer CO2 emissions ?
It makes sense to reflect the cost of CO2 ( among many other factors ) in the price paid to drive our cars or heat our patios ; but when the phase-out proceeds more slowly than some lawmakers wish , a ban is not the right solution .
Real reductions in carbon emissions will occur only when better technology makes it worthwhile for individuals and businesses to change their behavior .
CFLs and other advances can take us part of the way , but there are massive technological hurdles to overcome before fossil fuels generally become less attractive than greener alternatives .
This is where a lot of policymakers get it wrong .
Governments talk far too much about setting a relatively high carbon tax on emissions , while focusing far too little on ensuring a meaningful increase in research and development to bring about necessary breakthroughs .
Limiting access to the ‘ wrong ’ light bulbs or patio heaters , ultimately , is not the right path .
We will only solve global warming by ensuring that alternative technologies are better than our current options .
Then , people the world over will choose to use them .
A Dissident in China
TOKYO – 2009 was a good year for China .
The Chinese economy still roared ahead in the midst of a worldwide recession .
American President Barack Obama visited China , more in the spirit of a supplicant to an imperial court than the leader of the world ’ s greatest superpower .
Even the Copenhagen summit on climate change ended just the way China wanted : failure in its attempt to commit China , or any other industrial nation , to making significant cuts in carbon emissions , with the United States getting the blame .
The Chinese government , under the Communist Party , has every reason to feel confident .
So why did a gentle former literature professor named Liu Xiaobo have to be sentenced to 11 years in prison , just because he publicly advocated freedom of expression and an end to one-party rule ?
Liu was co-author in 2008 of a petition , Charter 08 , signed by thousands of Chinese , calling for basic rights to be respected .
Liu is not a violent rebel .
His opinions , in articles published on the Internet , are entirely peaceful .
Yet he was jailed for “ inciting subversion of state power . ”
The notion that Liu might be capable of subverting the immense power of the Communist Party of China is patently absurd .
And yet the authorities clearly believe that they had to make an example of him , to prevent others from expressing similar views .
Why does a regime that appears to be so secure consider mere opinions , or even peaceful petitions , so dangerous ?
Perhaps because the regime does not feel as secure as it looks .
Without legitimacy , no government can rule with any sense of confidence .
There are many ways to legitimize political arrangements .
Liberal democracy is only a recent invention .
Hereditary monarchy , often backed by divine authority , has worked in the past .
And some modern autocrats , such as Robert Mugabe , have been bolstered by their credentials as national freedom fighters .
China has changed a great deal in the last century , but it has remained the same in one respect : it is still ruled by a religious concept of politics .
Legitimacy is not based on the give and take , the necessary compromises , and the wheeling and dealing that form the basis of an economic concept of politics such as that which underpins liberal democracy .
Instead , the foundation of religious politics is a shared belief , imposed from above , in ideological orthodoxy .
In imperial China , this meant Confucian orthodoxy .
The ideal of the Confucian state is “ harmony . ”
If all people conform to a particular set of beliefs , including moral codes of behavior , conflicts will disappear .
The ruled , in this ideal system , will naturally obey their rulers , just as sons obey their fathers .
After the various revolutions in the early decades of the twentieth century , Confucianism was replaced by a Chinese version of Communism .
Marxism appealed to Chinese intellectuals , because it was bookish , introduced a modern moral orthodoxy , and was based , like Confucianism , on a promise of perfect harmony .
Ultimately , in the Communist utopia , conflicts of interests would melt away .
Chairman Mao ’ s rule combined elements of the Chinese imperial system with Communist totalitarianism .
This orthodoxy , however , was also destined to fade away .
Few Chinese , even in the top ranks of the Communist Party , are convinced Marxists anymore .
This left an ideological vacuum , swiftly filled in the 1980 ’ s by greed , cynicism , and corruption .
Out of this crisis came the demonstrations all over China , collectively known as “ Tiananmen . ”
Liu Xiaobo was an active spokesman in 1989 for the student protests against official corruption and in favor of greater freedom .
Soon after the bloody crackdown on Tiananmen , a new orthodoxy replaced Chinese Marxism : Chinese nationalism .
Only one-party rule would guarantee the continuing rise of China and put an end to centuries of national humiliation .
The Communist Party represented China ’ s destiny as a great power .
To doubt this was not just mistaken , but unpatriotic , even “ anti-Chinese . ”
From this perspective , Liu Xiaobo ’ s critical views were indeed subversive .
They cast doubt on the official orthodoxy , and thus on the legitimacy of the state .
To wonder , as many have , why the Chinese regime refused to negotiate with the students in 1989 – or to find some accommodation with its critics today – is to misunderstand the nature of religious politics .
Negotiation , compromise , and accommodation are the marks of economic politics , where every deal has its price .
By contrast , those who rule according to a shared belief cannot afford to negotiate , for that would undermine the belief itself .
This is not to say that the economic concept of politics is utterly strange to the Chinese – or , for that matter , that the religious notion of politics is unknown in the democratic West .
But the insistence on orthodoxy is still sufficiently strong in China to remain the default defense against political critics .
These things can change .
Other Confucian societies , such as South Korea , Taiwan , and Japan , now have thriving liberal democracies , and there is no reason to believe that such a transition is impossible in China .
But external pressure is unlikely to bring it about .
Many non-Chinese , including me , have signed a letter of protest against the jailing of Liu Xiaobo .
One hopes that this will lend comfort to him , and give a moral boost to Chinese who share his views .
But it is unlikely to impress those who believe in the current orthodoxy of Chinese nationalism .
Until China is released from the grip of religious politics , Liu ’ s ideals are unlikely to take root .
This does not bode well for China , or , indeed , for the rest of the world .
Adjust and Reschedule or Delay and Default
BRUSSELS – As Greece activates its € 45 billion rescue package with the International Monetary Fund and the European Union , it is becoming clear that a new , far more comprehensive approach is needed .
Two problems need to be addressed : the credibility of Greece ’ s fiscal stabilization program , and how to cover the country ’ s medium-term financing gap .
The magnitude of the fiscal adjustment effort being demanded of Greece is now well known .
The deficit has to be reduced by at least 10 percentage points of GDP ( from around 13 % of GDP to less than 3 % of GDP ) .
The key problem , which has not been addressed so far , is that a fiscal adjustment on this scale requires the government to take two steps that can be implemented only with wide social approval : a cut in wages and a cut in social expenditure .
Both steps are now as unpopular in Greece as they are unavoidable .
The country ’ s competitiveness problems are also well known .
Unit labor costs have increased by 10-20 % more than in Germany .
Assuming that Greece wishes to stay within the eurozone , an “ internal devaluation , ” i.e. , a significant cut in nominal wages , is inevitable .
The government can ( and has ) cut wages in the public sector , but this is not sufficient .
A large cut in private-sector wages also is urgently needed to stimulate exports ( which currently amount to less than 20 % of GDP , even if one counts both goods and services ) to create at least one source of growth .
Greece thus needs a “ National Competitiveness Pact ” in which government , opposition , employers , and workers agree on a set of measures that cut unit labor costs by at least 10 % .
Three levers could be used to reach this goal : adjustment in nominal wages , extension of working time , and a reduction in social-security contributions ( compensated for by an increase in value-added tax ) .
The mix of measures should be left to Greece to decide , but a cut in unit labor costs of this size is an essential first step for a successful adjustment , and should be a pre-condition for the IMF / EU support package .
Deep cuts in social expenditure are also unavoidable in order to achieve sustainable public finances .
The growing fiscal deficits in Greece over the last decade were essentially the result of a massive increase in the size of state social benefits , from 20 % to close to 30 % of GDP , without any significant increase in tax revenues .
Contrary to popular perception , the public-sector wage bill is only of marginal importance .
The government has already forced through most of the necessary adjustment in this area .
Indeed , cuts in public-sector wages can yield at most 1-2 % of GDP in fiscal consolidation .
Given that social expenditure amounts to close to 60 % of total public spending , a successful fiscal adjustment will ultimately require that it be cut significantly .
The alternative , an increase in tax revenues by almost 50 % in the span of a few years , simply is not feasible .
Profound reform of the welfare state and building a modern tax administration system requires time .
But financial markets are in no mood to give Greece time , which brings us to the second major problem facing the country .
In order to gain the breathing space necessary for the reform process to be effective , the Greek government could just announce a simple rescheduling : the due date of all existing public debt is extended by five years at an unchanged interest rate .
In that case , the Greek government would face no redemptions for the next five years and would have to refinance about € 30 billion per year from 2015 onwards , which should be manageable by then .
Official financing needs would then be much more limited , and the IMF / EU package of around € 45 billion should be sufficient to cover most of the progressively lower deficits over this grace period .
Without such a rescheduling , it is unlikely that Greece will be able to roll over the approximately € 30 billion maturing annually for the next few years .
Over time , the eurozone countries would inevitably have to refinance most of Greece ’ s public debt .
This is a recipe for continuing political problems , as the Greeks would always consider the interest rate too high , while Germany would consider it too low ( at least relative to market rates ) .
Moreover , once the eurozone had started refinancing Greece without any contribution from private creditors , it would be politically impossible to stop .
The type of rescheduling proposed here would signal the Greek government ’ s readiness to service its debt in full , and thus might be accepted without too much disruption in financial markets .
Of course , markets would view any rescheduling without a credible adjustment program merely as a prelude to a real default later on , thus leading to an even higher risk premium .
But even the best adjustment program cannot be financed without some contribution by private creditors , i.e. , some form of rescheduling .
The only way out for Greece is thus to combine both elements : rescheduling its debt plus national agreements on wages and social expenditure .
The current approach – concentrating only on the financing needs and fiscal adjustment in 2010 , and leaving all the hard choices for later – will not work .
A Doomsday Scenario
As America debates whether or not to invade Iraq , fears that the country &apos;s economic recovery will stall are beginning to creep into the discussion ; with that , worries about the health of the global economy are growing , too .
A consensus is emerging that the gap between the US economy &apos;s growth potential and its actual performance will remain large for some time to come .
Can the situation get worse ?
Yes , it can : much worse .
A number of worrying factors about the US economy have been around for a long time :
huge trade deficits have persisted since Ronald Reagan &apos;s misguided tax cuts of 1981 converted America from the world &apos;s largest creditor into the world &apos;s largest debtor .
Today , these deficits set new records by the month ;
America &apos;s appallingly low savings rate .
When American wealth seemed to be growing year after year as the stock market boomed , this was understandable ; individual Americans were becoming richer without savings , so why bother ?
Today &apos;s savings rate , while it has increased slightly , still finds America at the bottom of the world &apos;s savings league tables ;
lax accounting standards .
The Arthur Anderson , Enron , and WorldCom scandals didn &apos;t emerge out of thin air , but had their origins in the mid-1990s , when the US Treasury actually intervened to stop attempts by the supposedly independent accounting standards board to improve matters .
Bad accounting contributed to the recent stock market bubble ; bad information led to stock prices that did not reflect underlying realities ; and these in turn provided incentives for the excess investment in telecoms that caused today &apos;s excess capacity .
To this old brew , new ingredients have been added , notably the most rapid change in a nation &apos;s fiscal posture the world has probably ever seen .
In a &quot; now you see it , now you don &apos;t &quot; move only a magician should love , the $ 3 trillion , ten year ( non social security ) US budget surplus was - in a matter of months - converted into a gaping deficit of $ 2 trillion dollars .
Of course , excuses are at hand : the magnitude of the economic downturn was not anticipated and the increased expenditures to fight terrorism could not be foretold .
Excuses , excuses .
As the old saying goes : Don &apos;t count your chickens before they hatch .
The Bush Administration not only counted its chickens , it sold them forward !
To anyone with decent eyesight , it was clear that the rosy budget projections of two years ago were nonsense .
Clear , too , was the fact that , in promoting its tax cuts , the Bush Administration was engaging ( on a multi-billion dollar scale ) in dishonest , Enron-like accounting .
So if things are so bad now , how can they get worse ?
Here &apos;s a plausible scenario .
To finance its trade deficit , America must borrow from abroad over a billion dollars a day .
When America was the only safe haven for global investors , this was easy .
But America today appears less safe .
The combination of lack of confidence in US corporate accounts , lack of confidence in America &apos;s economic policy management ( compounded by the mounting deficits ) , and America &apos;s soft underlying economic fundamentals , has dented the US economy &apos;s global reputation .
As foreigners start pulling their money out of a country they suspect , the dollar will weaken .
As the dollar weakens , America looks even less safe .
So a rush to the door begins .
While a weak dollar may be good for exports , a falling dollar will be accompanied by stock market losses and greater declines in confidence .
Eventually , even the almighty American consumer will be shaken and realize that he is poorer today than three years ago and that he better start putting money away for his retirement , especially given Bush &apos;s proposed risky experiments with the social security system .
At that point , Americans will join the stampede out of their economy .
Why shouldn &apos;t they ?
They &apos;re free to choose where to put their money .
Europe &apos;s stock markets will begin to look like an attractive alternative .
But this scenario offers no happy ending for Europe .
A weakening US economy and the strengthening Euro will dampen European exports .
The European Central Bank , fixated on inflation , will be slow to lower interest rates , and the European Stability Pact will make it impossible for fiscal policy to offset these weaknesses .
Europe will join America in a downturn , reinforcing America &apos;s decline and setting in motion a global downward spiral .
I am not predicting that this will happen .
I hope that the Bush Administration will enact policies to strengthen the US economy : a tax cut that might made minimal sense when it seemed that the US had a multi-trillion dollar surplus no longer makes any sense at all .
The Bush Administration should admit this , and redesign a tax program to strengthen the economy by making the country live within its means .
President Bush could even stabilize the economy , offering better unemployment benefits to provide needed stimulus if the downturn continues .
America is strong , and the global economy is strong .
Should the disastrous events contemplated here occur , a new global economy will eventually emerge from the ashes .
Downturns , of course , can never be fully prevented .
We can , however , decrease their frequency ; we can make them shallower ; we can ensure that fewer people are hurt and that those that get hurt are better protected .
Sadly , we are doing less than is possible to prevent things from getting worse and doing less than necessary to protect ourselves from the consequences .
A Double-Dip Recession for the US ?
Last winter , America &apos;s central bank - the Federal Reserve - was busy patting itself on the back .
The Fed &apos;s cut in its basic interest rate to 1.75 % per year seemed to have worked : the recession was ending .
Despite sobered expectations about the high-tech revolution &apos;s impact on productivity and profits , as well as the jitters inspired by the terror attack on the World Trade Center , American businesses , it was believed , would soon start investing again big-time because borrowing money at 1.75 % was too good a deal to pass up .
By late spring , those expectations had disintegrated alongside the collapse of Enron , WorldCom , and Arthur Andersen .
Suddenly , everyone doubted the integrity of the financial accounts of American companies .
Suddenly , everyone saw just how much America &apos;s system of corporate surveillance and control had deteriorated during the bubble of the 1990s .
The American stock market fell 15-20 % below its winter levels .
Spreads between the interest rate at which America &apos;s government could borrow and the interest rates at which America &apos;s corporations could borrow widened .
Suddenly , the Fed stopped congratulating itself : a 1.75 % interest rate might be the right interest rate to fuel a recovery when the Dow-Jones stock market index stands at 10,000 , but not when the Dow-Jones index stands at 8,500 .
Throughout the summer , corporate investment news remained disappointing .
More and more analysts began to speak about the possibility of a &quot; double dip &quot; recession .
Yet throughout all this , the Federal Reserve remained passive .
The short-term interest rates it controlled didn &apos;t budge .
Only in mid-August did the Fed hint that interest rates might be cut .
The informal and unofficial rationale leaking out of the Fed for its inaction had two parts .
First , short-term interest rates were already so low that everyone would see further cuts as temporary only .
They would thus have little effect on the longer-term rates that really drive business investment .
Second , short-term interest rates were so low that additional cuts would spook the financial markets : if even the Fed thought conditions warranted cuts , the argument went , businesses would respond not by increasing their investments but by reducing them .
The Fed &apos;s judgment appeared to be that it was largely ( if not completely ) powerless : it had done all that it could , and the levers of monetary policy were no longer strongly connected to determining the level of economic activity .
So the US in 2002 joined Japan in what economists have for sixty-five years called a Liquidity Trap : a situation in which the short-term nominal interest rates the central bank controls are so low and so loosely connected to the level of aggregate demand that further reductions are ineffective in fighting a recession .
America &apos;s situation was not unique : Japan had been in been in thrall to a liquidity trap since the mid-1990s .
But there had been no other examples since the Great Depression of the 1930s .
Whether America now really is in a liquidity trap is uncertain .
How long this state of affairs will last is unknown .
Nevertheless , even if America is only on the edge of a liquidity trap , and even if it moves away from the current state of affairs soon , this is a frightening situation .
If monetary policy is not effective , the only lever the American government has to manage its economy is fiscal policy : changes in the government &apos;s tax and spending plans to change the government &apos;s direct contribution to aggregate demand .
But the lesson of the decades since World War II is that the US government - with its complex , baroque , eighteenth-century organization - is incapable of changing policy fast enough to make effective use of fiscal policy as a tool for managing the economy .
It simply takes too long for changes in taxes and spending to work their way through Congress and the bureaucracy .
An America caught in a liquidity trap is , quite simply , a country with no effective tools of macroeconomic management .
There have been two eras since World War II when policymakers - American policymakers , at least - believed that they had solved the riddle of the business cycle and had learned how to manage a modern industrial or post-industrial economy .
The first was the Keynesian high-water mark of confidence in demand management of the 1960s .
It was destroyed by the inflation of the Vietnam era and the oil-price shocks of the 1970s .
The second was the decade of successful business-cycle management by Alan Greenspan &apos;s independent , apolitical , and technocratic Fed during the 1990s .
This second era now appears to have been as fleeting as the first .
Eighty years ago , John Maynard Keynes argued that governments needed to take responsibility for maintaining full employment and price stability - that the pre-World War I gold standard had not been the golden age people thought it was , and that its successes were the result of a lucky combination of circumstances unlikely to be repeated .
Keynes was an optimist in believing that governments could learn to manage the business cycle .
He would be shocked to look at today &apos;s world : a Europe with stubbornly high unemployment , a Japan mired in a decade of near stagnation , and now an America lacking the policy tools to deal with any additional unexpected economic bad news .
A Drug War on Auto-Pilot
THE HAGUE – The war in Afghanistan , now approaching its tenth year , may seem to many to have no end in sight , but Latin America has endured an even longer fight , one that has recently become much more bloody : the “ war ” against drug trafficking .
So rote – and so violent – has that war become that many people in Latin America now wonder which side is suffering the more pathological addiction .
The new strategy that US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been promoting to staunch the upward trend of narco-trafficking-related murders – which leaked Mexican government reports put at more than 22,000 since late 2006 – is to build “ stronger , more resilient communities . ”
Ciudad Juárez , a sprawling Mexican border town that is now the homicide capital of the world , would have to be high on the list .
Four bridges and innumerable tunnels and drainage canals connect Ciudad Juárez and El Paso , Texas .
Rival cartels sparring for control of a plaza , the name given to any trafficking route , butcher each other and the security forces .
There is apparently no shortage of young , unemployed men willing to join the carnage .
Addressing the deep-seated social and economic problems of a city like Juárez , however , is a lot harder than flooding its streets with 8,000 soldiers carrying assault rifles .
Mexican President Felipe Calderón has , in this respect , remained faithful to the script written in previous theaters in the drug war , whether in Bolivia , Colombia , or Peru , where governments have used military force and extradition to placate the US and punish those with the least voice and influence .
But the language used by the Obama administration to describe the violence and state corruption that snakes from the Andes to the US border is starting to capture new thinking on narcotics .
Three former Latin American presidents , Mexico ’ s second richest man , Ricardo Salinas , and the Supreme Court of Argentina , among others , have criticized the war on drugs as a manifest failure that has lowered street prices , fueled production , and undermined weak states .
More strikingly , both Bolivia and Ecuador are governed by presidents who suffered directly from the collateral insensitivities of the war on drugs .
Bolivia ’ s Evo Morales rose to prominence as leader of the country ’ s coca growers during a brutal campaign to wipe out their crops , the so-called Dignity Plan .
Ecuadoran President Rafael Correa ’ s father was jailed for smuggling drugs to the US when the future leader was five years old .
These leaders ’ profound ambivalence toward the goal of a world free of illegal drugs is shared by the European Union , where restrictions on narcotics consumption have slackened over the past decade .
The past three US presidents , furthermore , have all admitted to consuming – to one extent or another – illegal psychoactive substances , while seven million Americans , according to the United Nations , are regular cocaine users .
But the inertia of a bureaucratic drug-enforcement superstructure ( worth approximately $ 40 billion each in the US and the EU ) , sustained by a deep-seated fear of the “ threat ” posed by drugs and cartels , appears to push policy repeatedly towards the familiar option of repressive auto-pilot .
For example , US support for Mexico ’ s campaign against the cartels looks set in stone , with Congress apparently ready to provide $ 300 million for another year of military and security upgrading .
In Colombia , seven new joint military installations are planned , and support for US private contractors who have cornered the market in crop fumigation presumably will not be interrupted .
Nevertheless , as the flaws in the four-decade-old edifice of counter-narcotics become more visible , it is increasingly difficult to regard the risks of drug use as being greater than the damage done by repression .
Prohibition hikes the mark-up on prices – an astounding 15,000 % in the case of cocaine traveling to Europe from Andean processing facilities .
While the war on drugs focuses on bringing down cartels and their kingpins , it perversely aids the health of their markets , which nestle within legitimate trade flows and respond to price incentives .
Interviewed by the Mexican magazine Proceso this year , the second-in-command of the giant Sinaloa cartel , Ismael Zambada , made the point clearly : “ The narco problem involves millions of people .
How do you control it ?
The capos can be jailed , killed , or extradited , but their replacements are already wandering around . ”
The emergence of Latin America ’ s powerful drug mafias cannot be traced to the radical evil of certain individuals .
These people emerged under conditions created in deeply inequitable societies by a misapplied , inconsistent , and bureaucratic war .
Indeed , the furies of the Zetas in Mexico originate in the counter-insurgency training provided in the 1990 ’ s to a select group of special-forces soldiers , who later deserted .
The Zetas ’ star recruits in recent years have come from the Guatemalan military ’ s special forces , whose infamous induction technique involved biting off the head of a live chicken .
Meanwhile , in Jamaica and across the rural outposts of Central America , drug lords have become benefactors and heroes to the poor .
It is time for serious reconsideration of the status and regulation of illegal drugs , pointing to selective legalization , as well as reclassification of the market as a public-health , rather than a criminal , concern .
For now , policymakers across the Americas are tiptoeing towards the obvious .
A Dutch Pontius Pilate in Srebrenica
The British diplomat and historian Harold Nicholson once said that a diplomat is an honest gentlemen sent abroad to tell lies for his country &apos;s good .
Recent official reports from The Hague regarding the conduct of the Dutch Battalion in Sreberenica in Bosnia in l995 may suggest that sometimes UN Blue Helmets are honest people sent abroad to protect victims of aggression -- and may find themselves in the position of facilitating genocide .
This is perhaps not exactly what happened with the Dutch Battalion in Srebrenica , but the recent 6000-page report of the Dutch Institute for War Documentation ( NIO ) suggests that when it comes to taking responsibility for the hideous massacre of 7,000 Bosnian Muslims under the eyes of a UN protective force ( UNPROFOR ) in Srebrenica , everyone now washes their hands and looks somewhere else to find who is responsible .
The details of what happened in the UN protected area of Srebrenica in July l995 are complex , and obviously a Rashomon-like set of accounts is what one would get under such circumstances .
Even the Dutch report , for all its attempted fairness , cannot give a full authorized picture .
Yet a
few facts are incontestable :
Srebrenica was a UN protected zone , a Muslim enclave in a Serb-held region ;
When the Bosnian Serbs , under General Ratko Mladic , occupied the town , the Dutch Battalion , though obviously outnumbered , did not oppose the military Serb action : such opposition was also not in its formal mandate -- after all , the Dutch were supposed to be &quot; neutral &quot; ;
Dutch officers were present when the Serbs gathered together the Muslim civilian population of Srebrenica and separated the men from women and children , taking the men away ; the Dutch did not object , nor did they try to confront the Serb forces with the idea that what they were doing is unacceptable ;
It is obvious that the Dutch Battalion could not militarily stop the Serbs from doing what they were doing ; yet there are always other options besides shooting -- or washing your hands and doing nothing .
It is clear that the outcome would have been different if the Dutch Battalion , regardless of its legalistic mandate and inferior power , would have threatened the Serbs with resisting the separation of Muslim men from Muslim women .
A credible threat of the use of power has a wonderful capacity to concentrate even a murderer &apos;s mind .
Imagine the following : what would have happened if the Dutch commander , instead of meeting with the Serb commanders over beer ( yes , this happened ! ) , would have told Mladic : &quot; Only over our dead bodies &quot; .
I can imagine that if the Dutch had been there protecting Dutch women and children , they would not have been as passive .
Indeed , they were not completely passive when confronted with the problem of saving their own lives or of negotiating the release of some of their comrades who were taken hostage by the Serbs .
But when the victims were &quot; mere &quot; Bosnian Muslims , basic humanity receded behind legalistic humbug and indifference .
The consequence of the shameful behavior of the Dutch is that the UN was complicit in war crimes -- and 7,000 Muslim men were brutally massacred in Srebrenica .
Some of this raises memory of the shameful visits during World War II of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the Nazi camp at Theresienstadt : the Red Cross basically found conditions satisfactory , though obviously not easy .
The inability of the official Dutch report to clearly accept responsibility for the failures of the Dutch Battalion underlines once more the bankruptcy of so many UN peacekeeping operations : they have no mandate to stop aggression forcibly , and they are supposed to be neutral .
But there can be no neutrality between murderers and victims -- yet neutrality is what the UN-controlled forces in Bosnia sought .
An end to the massacres came only when the US , and NATO , decided to use force against the Serbs .
Similarly , the UN and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) sponsored attemps to stop Serb violence in Kosovo also failed : only NATO , by using force , succeeded in putting an end to Serb massacres of the Albanian population .
Neither the Bosnian nor the Kosovo problems have yet found a permnanet solution : the killings , however , have stopped .
There are moments when unwillingness to use force is immoral , and moments when the measured use -- or threat of use -- of force may be the only moral alternative .
Srebrenica is a moral stain on the UN and UN-sponsored forces , and the lesson should be heeded for the future .
In Srebrenica , Pontius Pilate would have felt vindicated ; humanity , once again , was found to be wanting .
A Dutch Treat for Brazil ?
Brazil &apos;s successful return to the financial markets at the end of April and the strengthening of the country &apos;s currency , the real , have shown that the election of President Luiz Inácio da Silva ( Lula ) has not led to a collapse of foreign confidence .
But nor do recent positive developments eliminate the need for structural economic reforms .
Lula recognizes that progress in this area , including labor market reform , is critical if Brazil is to grow sufficiently to allow him to carry on his ambitious social agenda .
How Lula , a former metal worker and founder of CUT , which also represents most automobile workers , manages relations with the trade unions will be critical .
Recent strikes by car workers at General Motors , Renault , Volvo , and Ford factories in Brazil do not augur well .
Proposed social security and tax reforms , presented to Congress at the end of April , seem to be creating additional tension .
Lula should look to Europe for examples of how to achieve high rates of growth and job creation yet maintain social protection .
Europe also can provide a roadmap for politicians determined to move from being anti-market left-wingers in opposition to reform-minded statesmen holding power .
Spain &apos;s Felipe González and Britain &apos;s Tony Blair both made that journey .
But a better example may be Wim Kok , who stepped down last year after eight years as Dutch Prime Minister .
Both Lula and Kok share the unusual distinction of becoming heads of government after serving as trade union leaders .
Upon reaching the top of the FNV , Holland &apos;s largest trade union , Kok found himself in a position of considerable influence in Dutch economic policymaking .
During his tenure as a union leader in the late 1970s and early 1980s , the Dutch economy experienced prolonged malaise--stagnant growth , high unemployment , prohibitive interest rates , and low corporate profitability .
Large fiscal deficits crowded out private investment .
Holland &apos;s problems were mainly structural , although a cyclical economic downturn made matters worse .
By 1982 , the situation had deteriorated to the point that the &quot; social partners &quot; in the Dutch tripartite system ( government , business , and trade unions ) concluded that combating the crisis required a break with the past .
The defining moment came with the Wassenaar agreement of that year--a pact between employers and trade unions , reached with the active encouragement of government .
Trade unions agreed to moderate wage claims and abandon wage indexation , in exchange for reduced working time and improved prospects for the future .
The increased flexibility of the Dutch labor market eventually restored private-sector profitability and led to rapid job creation , among the highest in Europe and comparable to the rate in the US .
A prudent fiscal stance , pursued while the economy recovered and interest rates fell , created room for big cuts in taxes and social contributions .
With lower inflation , this raised workers &apos; real disposable income , enabling trade union leaders to demonstrate to their members that wage moderation worked and was in their interest .
The recent , much weaker , performance of the Dutch economy is largely explained by strong wage increases , which undermined competitiveness and contributed to job extinction .
This prompted Kok to call last year--on the 20th anniversary of the Wassenaar accord--for a new pact among the country &apos;s social partners .
He will soon have a European-wide platform to deliver his message of wage moderation and labor-market flexibility through his assignment to breathe new life into the EU employment strategy .
How is the Wassenaar model relevant to Brazil ?
Not unlike Holland in the early 1980s , Brazil &apos;s economy today faces the challenge of stimulating rapid employment growth amid fiscal constraints and high interest rates .
While Brazil &apos;s registered unemployment rate is not very high by regional standards , its fast growing labor force requires a high rate of job creation .
Emulating the Dutch experience with job creation provides the surest possible path to alleviating poverty in Brazil .
The idea is not that Brazil should seek to implement the Dutch social-economic model--the countries are too different for that .
But Lula can and should follow Kok &apos;s example and use his trade union connections , as well as his rapport with the working class , to achieve a social pact aimed at achieving sustained improvement in Brazil &apos;s overall economic performance and realizing its potential to become Latin America &apos;s economic powerhouse .
Brazil has benefited from an improvement in market sentiment and financial indicators since Lula &apos;s election .
Now its government should encourage a Wassenaar-style guarantee of social peace .
This would give the authorities room to address the country &apos;s daunting longer-term policy agenda--including a major reform of the costly pension system , an overhaul of the tax system , and strengthening the bankruptcy framework--that Brazil must face in order to boost competitiveness .
Lula &apos;s countrymen , who elected him overwhelmingly , need rapid economic growth and job creation .
That will happen only if Lula completes a successful transformation from anti-market trade union leader into a statesman judiciously blending economic and social reform .
Success would benefit not only Brazil , but have a strong demonstration effect across Latin America .
A Global &quot; New Deal &quot; ?
ATHENS – The International Monetary Fund ’ s belated admission that it significantly underestimated the damage that austerity would do to European Union growth rates highlights the self-defeating character of “ orthodox ” recipes to address the causes of the debt crisis that followed the financial crash of 2008-2009 .
Conventional theory suggests that a single country ( or group of countries ) consolidating its finances can expect lower interest rates , a weaker currency , and an improved trade position .
But , because this cannot happen for all major economies simultaneously – one country ’ s ( or group of countries ’ ) austerity implies less demand for other countries ’ products – such policies eventually lead to beggar-thy-neighbor situations .
Indeed , it was this dynamic – against which John Maynard Keynes fought – that made the Great Depression of the 1930 ’ s so grim .
Today ’ s problems are compounded by a lack of sufficient private demand – particularly household consumption – in the advanced economies to compensate for demand losses stemming from austerity .
During the last two decades , consumption drove these countries ’ economic growth , reaching historically high GDP shares .
Moreover , major advanced economies , such as the United States , Germany , and Japan , face longer-term fiscal problems in the form of aging populations or oversize welfare states , limiting their capacity to contribute to demand management .
Recent moves to ease monetary policy have been a step in the right direction ; but , so far , they have not proved to be a game changer .
For domestic demand to act as an engine of growth , policies should shift resources from investment to consumption .
While the magnitudes involved are huge , they must be attained if an extended period of low growth , high unemployment , and declining living standards among the world ’ s poorest is to be avoided .
International economic policy coordination should be significantly strengthened in order to deal effectively with changes on such a scale .
Start with Europe .
It is by now patently obvious that austerity and domestic reforms are not enough to pull the eurozone ’ s periphery out of deep recession .
Growing awareness of the failure of current policies is causing social discontent , civil disorder , and political instability , with the recently concluded Italian elections and the growing popular resistance to Greek reform efforts serving as a bellwether .
Returning the eurozone ’ s peripheral economies to the path of growth requires more than structural reforms and fiscal consolidation .
It also requires a substantial reform of the monetary union ’ s system of economic governance , aimed at restoring financial stability and lowering borrowing costs , together with a boost in external demand in order to compensate for the effects of austerity .
Reforming governance implies significant progress toward economic unification : centralizing European debt through Eurobonds , mobilizing sufficient rescue funds , allowing the European Central Bank to intervene in the primary bond markets , and establishing both a fiscal and a banking union .
This is a tall order , in view of the reluctance of most EU member states to cede competences to European institutions .
But Europe should move more decisively in this direction .
Otherwise , speculation on member states ’ national debt will persist , keeping borrowing costs at levels that are inconsistent with the conditions required to sustain economic recovery .
Concerning external demand , intra-European help in the form of reflationary policies in stronger economies is unlikely to prove sufficient , owing primarily to the fiscal and political conditions prevailing in Germany .
Implementing a Marshall Plan-type initiative by mobilizing EU budget resources and additional lending by the European Investment Bank to finance investments in weaker countries could be an alternative , but it lacks political support .
On a global scale , neither the US nor Japan is in a position to provide significant external stimulus .
Only the emerging and developing economies of Asia could effectively contribute to lifting global demand through a coordinated effort aimed at boosting domestic consumption , which , in turn , would stimulate additional investment .
Recent IMF experience suggests that , through appropriate coordination , private funds could be mobilized for big private-public partnership projects linking demand expansion with infrastructure investment .
In other words , a global “ New Deal ” – combining policies designed to achieve an orderly realignment of consumption and investment worldwide – seems to be required .
The advanced economies should promote productivity-enhancing structural reforms with renewed vigor .
The eurozone should solidify its currency union .
And the emerging and developing economies should support domestic sources of growth .
For such a deal to become possible , certain preconditions must be met .
First , international policy coordination by the G-20 must be tightened by creating a permanent secretariat to make policy proposals and recommendations concerning macroeconomic and financial developments .
The secretariat should actively cooperate with the IMF to benefit from its analysis , notably regarding exchange rates .
Second , global financial reform must proceed at a faster pace .
The financial sector requires tougher regulation , strengthened supervision , and internationally consistent resolution mechanisms to address the problems posed by very large , global institutions that are considered too big ( or too complex ) to fail .
Such reform is essential if the international financial system is to mediate the sizeable resource transfers that will underpin the required changes in the structure of global demand .
Finally , a new trade pact – possibly , but not necessarily , within the Doha Round – is needed to ensure the major trading powers ’ access to foreign markets .
This is critically important for inspiring confidence in Asian countries , which might be persuaded to favor domestic , as opposed to external , sources of demand .
Moreover , trade liberalization will also increase consumer confidence worldwide .
The time is right for a new global settlement that targets growth , addresses crisis conditions in certain parts of the world , and rebalances the global economy to set it back on a path of strong and steady growth .
The Other Financial Crisis
NEWPORT BEACH – Two variants of financial crisis continue to wreak havoc on Western economies , fueling joblessness and poverty : the one that we read about regularly in newspapers , involving governments around the world ; and a less visible one at the level of small and medium-size businesses and households .
Until both are addressed properly , the West will remain burdened by sluggish growth , persistently high unemployment , and excessive income and wealth inequality .
The sovereign-debt crisis is well known .
In order to avert a likely depression , governments around the world engaged in fiscal and monetary stimulus in the midst of the global financial crisis .
They succeeded in offsetting nasty economic dislocations caused by private-sector deleveraging , but at the cost of encumbering their fiscal balances and their central banks ’ balance sheets .
While sovereign credit quality has deteriorated virtually across the board , and will most probably continue to do so , the implications for individual countries vary .
Some Western countries – such as Greece – had fragile government accounts from the outset and tipped quickly into persistent crisis mode .
There they remain , still failing to provide citizens with a light at the end of what already has been a long tunnel .
Other countries had been fiscally responsible , but were overwhelmed by the liabilities that they had assumed from others ( for example , Ireland ’ s irresponsible banks sank their budget ) .
Still others , including the United States , faced no immediate threat but failed to make progress on longer-term issues . A few , like Germany , had built deep economic and financial resilience through years of fiscal discipline and structural reforms .
It is not surprising that policy approaches have also varied .
Indeed , they have shared only one , albeit crucial ( and disappointing ) feature : the inability to rely on rapid growth as the “ safest ” way to deleverage an over-indebted economy .
Greece essentially defaulted on some obligations .
Ireland opted for austerity and reforms , as has the United Kingdom .
The US is gradually transferring resources from creditors to debtors through financial repression .
And Germany is slowly acquiescing to a prudent relative expansion in domestic demand .
So much for the sovereign-debt crisis , which , given its national , regional , and global impact , has been particularly well covered .
After all , sovereigns are called that because they have the power to impose taxes , regulations , and , at the extreme , confiscation .
But the other credit crisis is equally consequential , and receives much less attention , even as it erodes societies ’ integrity , productive capabilities , and ability to maintain living standards ( particularly for the least fortunate ) .
I know of very few Western countries where small and medium-size companies , as well as middle-income households and those of more limited means , have not experienced a significant decline in their access to credit – not just new financing , but also the ability to roll over old credit lines and loans .
The immediate causes are well known .
They range from subdued bank lending to unusually high risk aversion , and from discredited credit vehicles to the withdrawal of some institutions from credit intermediation altogether .
Such credit constraints are one reason why unemployment rates continue to rise in so many countries – often from already alarming levels , such as 25 % in Greece and Spain ( where youth unemployment is above 50 % ) – and why unemployment remains unusually high in countries like the US ( albeit it at a much lower level ) .
This is not just a matter of lost capabilities and rising poverty ; persistently high unemployment also leads to social unrest , erosion of trust in political leaders and institutions , and the mounting risk of a lost generation .
Indeed , unemployment data in many advanced countries are dominated by long-term joblessness ( usually defined as six months or more ) .
Skill erosion becomes a problem for those with prior work experience , while unsuccessful first-time entrants into the labor force are not just unemployed , but risk becoming unemployable .
Governments are doing too little to address the private credit debacle .
Arguably , they must first sort out the sovereign side of the crisis ; but it is not clear that most officials even have a comprehensive plan .
Policy asymmetry is greatest for the countries most acutely affected by the sovereign-debt crisis .
There , the private sector has essentially been left to fend for itself ; and most households and companies are struggling , thus fueling continued economic implosion .
Other countries appear to have adopted a “ Field of Dreams ” – also known as “ build it and they will come ” – approach to private credit markets , In the US , for example , artificially low interest rates for home mortgages , resulting from the Federal Reserve ’ s policy activism , are supposed to kick-start prudent financing .
The European Central Bank is taking a similarly indirect approach .
In both places , other policymaking entities , with much better tools at their disposal , appear either unwilling or unable to play their part .
As such , action by central banks will repeatedly fail to gain sufficient traction .
In fact , only the UK is visibly opting for a more coordinated and direct way to counter the persistent shortfalls stemming from the private part of the credit crisis .
There , the “ Funding for Lending Scheme , ” jointly designed by the Bank of England and the Treasury , seeks “ to boost the incentive for banks and building societies to lend to UK households and non-financial companies , ” while holding them accountable for proper behavior .
The UK example is important ; but , given the scope and scale of the challenges , the proposal is a relatively modest one .
The program may stimulate some productive credit intermediation , but it will not make a significant dent in what will remain one of the major obstacles to robust economic recovery .
Proper access to credit for productive segments is an integral part of a well-functioning economy .
Without it , growth falters , job creation is insufficient , and widening income and wealth inequality undermines the social fabric .
That is why any comprehensive approach to restoring the advanced countries ’ economic and financial vibrancy must target the proper revival of private credit flows .
Toxic Politics Versus Better Economics
NEW YORK – The relationship between politics and economics is changing .
Advanced-country politicians are locked in bizarre , often toxic , conflicts , instead of acting on a growing economic consensus about how to escape a protracted period of low and unequal growth .
This trend must be reversed , before it structurally cripples the advanced world and sweeps up the emerging economies , too .
Obviously , political infighting is nothing new .
But , until recently , the expectation was that if professional economists achieved a technocratic consensus on a given policy approach , political leaders would listen .
Even when more radical political parties attempted to push a different agenda , powerful forces – whether moral suasion from G7 governments , private capital markets , or the conditionality attached to International Monetary Fund and World Bank lending – would almost always ensure that the consensus approach eventually won the day .
In the 1990s and 2000s , for example , the so-called Washington Consensus dominated policymaking in much of the world , with everyone from the United States to a multitude of emerging economies pursuing trade liberalization , privatization , greater use of price mechanisms , financial-sector deregulation , and fiscal and monetary reforms with a heavy supply-side emphasis .
The embrace of the Washington Consensus by multilateral institutions amplified its transmission , helping to drive forward the broader process of economic and financial globalization .
Incoming governments – particularly those led by non-traditional movements , which had risen to power on the back of domestic unease and frustration with mainstream parties – sometimes disagreed with the appropriateness and relevance of the Washington Consensus .
But , as Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva demonstrated with his famous policy pivot in 2002 , that consensus tended largely to prevail .
And it continued to hold sway as recently as almost two years ago , when Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras executed an equally notable U-turn .
But after years of unusually sluggish and strikingly non-inclusive growth , the consensus is breaking down .
Advanced-country citizens are frustrated with an “ establishment ” – including economic “ experts , ” mainstream political leaders , and dominant multinational companies – which they increasingly blame for their economic travails .
Anti-establishment movements and figures have been quick to seize on this frustration , using inflammatory and even combative rhetoric to win support .
They do not even have to win elections to disrupt the transmission mechanism between economics and politics .
The United Kingdom proved that in June , with its Brexit vote – a decision that directly defied the broad economic consensus that remaining within the European Union was in Britain ’ s best interest .
The referendum happened for one reason : in 2013 , then-Prime Minister David Cameron feared that he would be unable to secure sufficiently his Conservative Party base in the general election that year .
So he pandered to Euroskeptic voters with the promise of a referendum .
The source of Cameron ’ s fear ?
The political disruption caused by the UK Independence Party – an anti-establishment party that ended up winning only one seat in Parliament and subsequently found itself leaderless and in turmoil .
Now , it seems , the floodgates have opened .
At the recent Conservative Party annual conference , speeches by Prime Minister Theresa May and members of her cabinet revealed an intention to pursue a “ hard Brexit , ” thereby dismantling trading arrangements that have served the economy well .
They also included attacks on “ international elites ” and criticism of Bank of England policies that were instrumental in stabilizing the British economy in the referendum ’ s immediate aftermath – thus giving May ’ s new government time to formulate a coherent Brexit strategy .
Several other advanced economies are experiencing analogous political developments .
In Germany , a surprisingly strong showing by the far-right Alternative für Deutschland in recent state elections already appears to be affecting the government ’ s behavior .
In the US , even if Donald Trump ’ s presidential campaign fails to put a Republican back in the White House ( as appears increasingly likely , given that , in the latest twist of this highly unusual campaign , many Republican leaders have now renounced their party ’ s nominee ) , his candidacy will likely leave a lasting impact on American politics .
If not managed well , Italy ’ s constitutional referendum in December – a risky bid by Prime Minister Matteo Renzi to consolidate support – could backfire , just like Cameron ’ s referendum did , causing political disruption and undermining effective action to address the country ’ s economic challenges .
Make no mistake : solid and credible policy options are available .
After years of mediocre economic performance , there is widespread agreement that a shift away from excessive dependence on unconventional monetary policy is needed .
As IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde put it , “ central banks cannot be the only game in town . ”
And yet they have been .
As I argue in The Only Game in Town , published in January , countries need a more comprehensive policy approach , involving pro-growth structural reforms , more balanced demand management ( including higher fiscal spending on infrastructure ) , and better cross-border policy coordination and architecture .
There is also a need , highlighted by the protracted Greek crisis , to address pockets of severe over-indebtedness , which can have crushing impact extending well beyond the directly affected .
The emergence of a new consensus on these points is good news .
But , in the current political environment , translating that consensus into action is likely to happen too slowly , at best .
The risk is that , as bad politics crowds out good economics , popular anger and frustration will rise , making politics even more toxic .
One hopes that enlightened political leadership takes the reins in time to make the needed mid-course corrections voluntarily , before unambiguous signs of economic and financial crisis force policymakers to scramble to minimize the damage .
Is the Deflation Cycle Over ?
CAMBRIDGE – Until the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 , deflation had all but disappeared as a concern for policymakers and investors in the advanced economies , apart from Japan , which has been subject to persistent downward pressure on prices for nearly a generation .
And now deflationary fears are on the wane again .
By the mid-1960s , the advanced economies began an era of rising inflationary pressures , ignited largely by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in the United States , and acutely compounded by the oil price hikes of the 1970s .
Stagflation , the combination of low economic growth and high inflation , became a buzzword by the end of that decade .
Most contemporary market forecasts extrapolated those trends , predicting an uninterrupted upward march in oil and commodity prices .
Inflation came to be seen as chronic , and politicians looked toward price controls and income policies .
Real ( inflation-adjusted ) short-term interest rates were consistently negative in most of the advanced economies .
Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker ’ s monumental tightening of US monetary policy in October 1979 ended that long cycle .
Stagflation gave way to a new buzzword : disinflation , which accurately characterized many advanced economies , as inflation rates fell from double digits .
But disinflation is not the same as deflation .
As shown in the figure , between 1962 and 1986 , not a single advanced economy recorded an annual decline in prices .
In many emerging markets , inflation rates soared into triple digits , with several cases of hyperinflation .
As late as 1991 , Greece had an inflation rate of about 20 % .
Even in historically price-stable Switzerland at that time , inflation was running above 5 % .
This seems a distant memory after the steady decline in prices in Greece since 2013 , alongside a debt crisis and collapse in output .
The Swiss National Bank , for its part , has been battling with the deflationary effects of the franc ’ s dramatic appreciation over the past few years .
The deflationary forces were unleashed by the major economic and financial dislocations associated with the deep and protracted global crisis that erupted in 2008 .
Private deleveraging became a steady headwind to central bank efforts to reflate .
In 2009 , about one-third of advanced economies recorded a decline in prices – a post-war high .
In the years that followed , the incidence of deflation remained high by post-war standards , and most central banks persistently undershot their extremely modest inflation objectives ( around 2 % ) .
Because US President Donald Trump ’ s stimulus plans are procyclical – they are likely to gain traction when the US economy is at or near full-employment – they have reawakened expectations that the US inflation rate is headed higher .
Indeed , inflation is widely expected to surpass the Federal Reserve ’ s 2 % objective .
But tighter monetary conditions act to mitigate the magnitude of the inflation spurt : while the expected rise in US policy rates is the most modest and gradual “ normalization ” in the Fed ’ s history , sustained dollar appreciation should limit price gains for a broad range of imported goods and their domestic competitors .
This expected turning point in the behavior of prices is not unique to the US .
If the International Monetary Fund ’ s projections for 2017 are approximately correct , this year will be the first in a decade that no advanced economy is experiencing deflation ( figure ) .
Perhaps the long-awaited effects of the historic monetary expansion are finally yielding fruit .
Most likely , currency depreciation in the UK , Japan , and the eurozone has been a catalyst .
If 2017 really does mark a broad reversal of a decade of deflation , it is reasonable to expect that most major central banks will be not be inclined to overreact if , after a decade or so ( longer for Japan ) of mostly downside disappointments , inflation overshoots its target .
Furthermore , the view that higher inflation targets ( perhaps 4 % ) may be desirable ( because they would provide central banks with more space to lower interest rates in the advent of a future recession ) has gained ground in some academic and policy quarters .
Of course , there may be yet another factor motivating major central banks ’ tolerance for higher inflation .
But their leaders may be unwilling to acknowledge it openly : as I have argued elsewhere , a steady dose of even moderate inflation will help to erode the mountains of public and private debt advanced economies have built up in the past 15 years or so .
Another Lesson from Japan
NEW HAVEN – Yet another in a long string of negative inflation surprises is at hand .
In the United States , the so-called core CPI ( consumer price index ) – which excludes food and energy – has headed down just when it was supposed to be going up .
Over the three months ending in May , the core CPI was basically unchanged , holding , at just 1.7 % above its year-earlier level .
For a US economy that is widely presumed to be nearing the hallowed ground of full employment , this comes as a rude awakening – particularly for the Federal Reserve , which has pulled out all the stops to get inflation back to its 2 % target .
Halfway around the world , a similar story continues to play out in Japan .
But , for the deflation-prone Japanese economy , it ’ s a much tougher story .
Through April , Japan ’ s core CPI was basically flat relative to its year-earlier level , with a similar outcome evident in May for the Tokyo metropolitan area .
For the Bank of Japan ( BoJ ) , which committed an unprecedented arsenal of unconventional policy weapons to arrest a 19-year stretch of 16.5 % deflation lasting from 1994 to 2013 , this is more than just a rude awakening .
It is an embarrassment bordering on defeat .
This story is global in scope .
Yes , there are a few notable outliers – namely , the United Kingdom , where currency pressures and one-off holiday distortions are temporarily boosting core inflation to 2.4 % , and Malaysia , where the removal of fuel subsidies has boosted headline inflation , yet left the core stable at around 2.5 % .
But they are exceptions in an otherwise inflationless world .
The International Monetary Fund ’ s latest forecasts bear this out .
Notwithstanding a modest firming of global economic growth , inflation in the advanced economies is expected to average slightly less than 2 % in 2017-2018 .
The first chapter of this tale was written many years ago , in Japan .
From asset bubbles and excess leverage to currency suppression and productivity impairment , Japan ’ s experience – with lost decades now stretching to a quarter-century – is testament to all that can go wrong in large and wealthy economies .
But no lesson is more profound than that of a series of policy blunders made by the BoJ .
Not only did reckless monetary accommodation set the stage for Japan ’ s demise ; the country ’ s central bank compounded the problem by taking policy rates to the zero bound ( and even lower ) , embracing quantitative easing , and manipulating long-term interest rates in the hopes of reviving the economy .
This has created an unhealthy dependency from which there is no easy exit .
Though Japan ’ s experience since the early 1990s provides many lessons , the rest of the world has failed miserably at heeding them .
Volumes have been written , countless symposiums have been held , and famous promises have been made by the likes of former US Fed chairman Ben Bernanke never to repeat Japan ’ s mistakes .
Yet time and again , other major central banks – especially the Fed and the European Central Bank – have been quick to follow , with equally dire consequences .
The inflation surprise of 2017 offers three key insights .
First , the relationship between inflation and economic slack – the so-called Phillips curve – has broken down .
Courtesy of what the University of Geneva ’ s Richard Baldwin calls the “ second unbundling ” of globalization , the world is awash in the excess supply of increasingly fragmented global supply chains .
Outsourcing via these supply chains dramatically expands the elasticity of the global supply curve , fundamentally altering the concept of slack in labor and product markets , as well as the pressure such slack might put on inflation .
Second , today ’ s globalization is inherently asymmetric .
For a variety of reasons – hangovers from balance-sheet recessions in Japan and the US , fear-driven precautionary saving in China , and anemic consumption in productivity-constrained Europe – the demand side of most major economies remains severely impaired .
Juxtaposed against a backdrop of ever-expanding supply , the resulting imbalance is inherently deflationary .
Third , central banks are all but powerless to cope with the moving target of what can be called a non-stationary liquidity trap .
First observed by John Maynard Keynes during the Great Depression of the 1930s , the liquidity trap describes a situation in which policy interest rates , having reached the zero bound , are unable to stimulate chronically deficient aggregate demand .
Sound familiar ?
The novel twist today is the ever-expanding global supply curve .
That makes today ’ s central banks even more impotent than they were in the 1930s .
This is not an incurable disease .
In a world of hyper-globalization – barring a protectionist relapse led by the America Firsters – treatment needs to be focused on the demand side of the equation .
The most important lesson from the 1930s , as well as from the modern-day Japanese experience , is that monetary policy provides no answer for a chronic deficiency of aggregate demand .
Addressing it is a task primarily for fiscal authorities .
The idea that central banks should consider making a new promise to raise their inflation targets is hardly credible .
In the meantime , Fed Chair Janet Yellen is right ( finally ) to push the Fed to normalize policy , putting an end to a failed experiment that has long outlived its usefulness .
The danger all along has been that open-ended unconventional monetary easing would fail to achieve traction in the real economy , and would inject excess liquidity into US and global financial markets that could lead to asset bubbles , reckless risk taking , and the next crisis .
Moreover , because unconventional easing was a strategy designed for an emergency that no longer exists , it leaves the Fed with no ammunition to fight the inevitable next downturn and crisis .
We ignore history at great peril .
The latest disappointment for inflation-targeting central banks is really not a surprise after all .
The same is true of the related drop in long-term interest rates .
There is much to be gained by studying carefully the lessons of Japan .
Recovery is Not Resolution
CAMBRIDGE – Earlier this year , the consensus view among economists was that the United States would outstrip its advanced-economy rivals .
The expected US growth spurt would be driven by the economic stimulus package described in President Donald Trump ’ s election campaign .
But the most notable positive economic news of 2017 among the developed countries has been coming from Europe .
Last week , the International Monetary Fund revised upward its growth projections for the eurozone , with the more favorable outlook extending broadly across member countries and including the Big Four : Germany , France , Italy , and Spain .
IMF Chief Economist Maurice Obstfeld characterized recent developments in the global economy as a “ firming recovery . ”
Growth is also expected to pick up in Asia ’ s advanced economies , including Japan .
As I noted in a previous commentary , Iceland , where the financial crisis dates to 2007 , has already been dealing with a fresh wave of capital inflows for some time , leading to concerns about potential overheating .
A few days ago , Greece , the most battered of Europe ’ s crisis countries , was able to tap global financial markets for the first time in years .
With a yield of more than 4.6 % , Greece ’ s bonds were enthusiastically snapped up by institutional investors .
Greek and European officials hailed the bond sale as a milestone for a country that had lost access to global capital markets back in 2010 .
Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras said the debt issue was a sign that his country is on the path to a definitive end to its prolonged crisis .
In the US , the Federal Reserve ’ s ongoing exit from ultra-easy post-crisis monetary policy adds to the sense among market participants and other countries ’ policymakers that normal times are returning .
But are they ?
Do recent positive developments in the advanced countries , which were at the epicenter of the global financial crisis of 2008 , mean that the brutal aftermath of that crisis is finally over ?
Good news notwithstanding , declaring victory at this stage ( even a decade later ) appears premature .
Recovery is not the same as resolution .
It may be instructive to recall that in other protracted post-crisis episodes , including the Great Depression of the 1930s , economic recovery without resolution of the fundamental problems of excessive leverage and weak banks usually proved shallow and difficult to sustain .
During the “ lost decade ” of the Latin American debt crisis in the 1980s , Brazil and Mexico had a significant and promising growth pickup in 1984-1985 – before serious problems in the banking sector , an unresolved external debt overhang , and several ill-advised domestic policy initiatives cut those recoveries short .
The post-crisis legacy was finally shaken off only several years later with the restoration of fiscal sustainability , debt write-offs under the so-called Brady Plan , and a variety of domestic structural reforms .
Since its 1992 banking crisis , Japan has suffered several false starts .
There were recoveries in 1995-1996 and again in 2000 and 2010 ; but they tended to be cut short by the failure to write down bad debt ( the so-called zombie loans ) , several premature policy reversals , and an increasingly unsustainable accumulation of government debt .
The eurozone emerged from the financial crisis in 2008-2009 with some economic momentum .
Unlike the Federal Reserve , however , the European Central Bank hiked interest rates in early 2011 , which contributed to the region ’ s descent into a deeper crisis .
History , therefore , suggests caution before concluding that the current recovery has the makings of a more sustainable and broad-based variety .
Many of the economic problems created or exacerbated by the crisis remain unresolved .
All of the advanced economies ( to varying degrees ) have significant legacy debts ( public and private ) from the excesses that set the stage for the financial crisis , as well as from the prolonged impact of the crisis on the real economy .
Low interest rates have eased the burden of those debts ( in effect , negative real interest rates are a tax on bondholders ) , but rates are on the rise .
Political polarization in the US and the United Kingdom is at or near historic highs , depending on the measure used .
As a result , many critical but politically sensitive policies to ensure future fiscal sustainability remain unresolved in both countries .
The UK ’ s withdrawal from the European Union – and Brexit ’ s medium-term impact on the British economy – is another source of risk that has yet to be tackled .
How Japan will resolve its public and private debt overhang is yet to be determined .
I have argued elsewhere that inflation will likely be part of that resolution , as it is improbable that an aging population will vote to raise its tax burden and reduce its benefits sufficiently to put Japan ’ s debt trajectory on a sustainable path .
In Europe , the high level of non-performing loans continues to act as a drag on economic growth , by inhibiting new credit creation .
Furthermore , these bad assets pose a substantial contingent liability for some governments .
Target2 , the euro ’ s real-time gross settlement system , has emerged as the eurozone ’ s mechanism for financing the emergence of widening structural balance-of-payments gaps , whereby capital flows out of southern Europe into Germany .
For Greece , Italy , Portugal , and Spain , public-sector debt must now also include the central bank ’ s sharply rising debts .
Perhaps the main lesson is that even more caution is warranted in deciding whether the time is ripe to “ normalize ” monetary policy .
Even in the best of recovery scenarios , policymakers would be ill-advised to kick the can down the road on structural reforms and fiscal measures needed to mitigate risk premia .
A Rest Stop for Europe
PRINCETON – Last week , in a highly anticipated speech , German President Joachim Gauck cautioned against the blind pursuit of an “ ever-closer ” European Union , acknowledging that the growing inequality among member states is generating “ a sense of unease , even unmistakable anger , ” and increasing the risk of national humiliation .
He pointed out that , in addition to the economic crisis , there is “ a crisis of confidence in Europe as a political project . ”
While Gauck made clear that he remains decidedly pro-Europe , he highlighted the need for closer reflection about Europe ’ s future – and especially that of the eurozone .
Standing on the verge of greater integration , Europeans are hesitant , “ unsure whether we should really stride out on the onward journey . ”
Addressing this hesitation , he declared , will require a thoughtful , nuanced understanding of what “ more Europe ” actually means .
Gauck may not have gone far enough : At this point , an ever-closer union may be a political mirage .
Any meaningful progress toward stabilizing the eurozone would require a significant – potentially open-ended – financial commitment , and the EU is not politically ready to cross that threshold .
Repeatedly pretending to move forward , then pulling back at the critical point , exacerbates political uncertainty and economic vulnerability .
Rather than indecisively pursuing more unity , this may be the moment to restore effective sovereignty to national authorities in eurozone countries .
Such a move would alleviate anxiety in the short term , thereby giving Europeans the opportunity to regroup in preparation for future steps toward a more integrated Europe and a more resilient euro .
To this end , eurozone leaders must take three key steps .
The dysfunctional system of European fiscal governance should be dismantled ; fiscal responsibility should be returned to member states ; and , to minimize the risk of excessive future lending , private lenders should be required to bear the losses implied by unsustainable sovereign debt .
The case against European fiscal governance is straightforward .
Before the crisis , the single-minded emphasis on reducing national budget deficits to less than 3 % of GDP led to extensive abuse .
Either the target was openly flouted , as it was in leading economies like Germany and France , or the data were manipulated to obscure problems ( a common practice throughout the eurozone , not just in Greece ) .
And the belief in economic growth as a fiscal panacea led to unrealistically optimistic GDP forecasts .
When the crisis struck , the 3 % deficit target became the focal point for unrelenting austerity – a form of what anthropologist Clifford Geertz described as “ involution , ” which occurs when a process intensifies rather than changes in response to external or internal pressure .
In other words , EU leaders began to complicate fiscal governance , ultimately creating an inefficient , inescapable labyrinth of regulation and bureaucracy .
As fiscal metrics become increasingly intricate , monitoring efforts will become ever easier to undermine .
The case for returning fiscal responsibility to national authorities is also strong – and not only because centralized fiscal authority has proved to be so inefficient .
With citizens of distressed countries bearing the fiscal burden of the crisis , the enduring presumption that they will not act responsibly is patronizing , at best .
And the current strategy of exchanging goodies for good behavior encourages game-playing and dilutes responsibility .
While the risk that governments will succumb to fiscal temptation remains , citizens ’ current suffering is likely to deter future excesses .
National fiscal sovereignty would facilitate the final crucial step : building a more mature relationship with private lenders .
The eurozone was founded on the “ no bailout ” principle : if member states could not repay their debts , lenders would bear the losses .
But lenders chose – correctly , as it turned out – to disregard that threat .
Instead of enforcing the no-bailout principle and establishing a precedent , debtor countries used official loans to repay private creditors .
As a result , these countries have condemned themselves to continued austerity , low growth , and high debt , while diminishing any future incentive for private lenders to impose fiscal discipline on sovereign borrowers .
Only by shifting the burden of responsibility back onto private lenders can debtor countries escape this quagmire .
In the United States , each state is responsible for its fiscal management , without being forced to comply with a single , overarching template .
The states are not regulated by the federal government ; they are disciplined by the knowledge that no one will repay their debts for them .
And the system seems to work : entering the crisis , US states had significantly lower deficit and debt ratios than the eurozone ’ s vulnerable member states .
So far , European integration has largely been a process of “ falling forward , ” with each stumble serving as a lesson from which a stronger union emerges .
But , while this uncertain approach may suffice as a basis for declarations of good intentions , it does not inspire the confidence required for countries to make the profound financial commitment that is now needed .
Europeans should have the chance to regain their footing .
Transferring fiscal responsibility back to national authorities would not only mean the end of counterproductive efforts to manage fiscal affairs centrally ; it would also diminish the sense of frustration and lack of control that is fueling Euro-skepticism .
In short , taking a step back would provide an opportunity to reset , to reflect , and to plot the best course toward a more stable , more integrated Europe .
For a fiscal union to function – however unlikely that outcome may be – a solid foundation is crucial .
As Gauck explained , Europeans “ are pausing to … equip &#91; themselves &#93; both intellectually and emotionally for the next step , which will require &#91; them &#93; to enter uncharted territory . ”
Giving Europeans the time and space to choose more Europe would reinforce the core values upon which integration has rested for more than six decades .
Continuing to stumble forward , however , would inevitably lead to a debilitating , if not fatal , fall .
Advertising ’ s New Age
MENLO PARK , CALIFORNIA – Advertising is of interest to everyone , not just marketers .
After all , it ’ s advertising that pays for much of the content that many of us see ( including this newspaper ) .
But it also tells us about new products and spurs companies to improve their products and services .
Of course , there ’ s good advertising and bad advertising ( and good and bad products ) .
Fortunately , advertising will ( and must ) change in a way that will accentuate the good and reduce the bad – because advertisers will increasingly need consumers ’ help in getting the word out , and consumers won ’ t support bad products .
( That ’ s a slightly Utopian overstatement , but there is some truth in it . )
Of course , sometimes I have a hard time explaining what I mean when I say that advertising must change .
It needs to move from sending “ messages ” to passive consumers to sponsorship , product placement and conversations with active consumers .
The traditional skills of advertising will give way to those of public relations .
Advertisers often look at me with a blank expression when I try to explain this .
So I use metaphors : imagine you sell sports shoes ( are you listening , Nike ? ) .
You ’ re not going to intrude on people having dinner in a restaurant , but you might well show up at a ball game , handing out free sneakers to the coolest-looking kids and joining in the festive atmosphere .
Or think of all the marketers whose brands are popular : people actually pay to wear their branded T-shirts – especially if the marketer is sponsoring a cause they believe in .
Now I have a practical example .
Last week , I met Suzanne Xie , a recent graduate in economics from the University of Chicago .
Her parents , Chinese immigrants , were engineers , and they encouraged her to go into a safe , prestigious career , so she joined a New York investment bank after graduation .
But little more than a year later , just before the financial meltdown , she and co-founder Richard Tong took an even riskier route – a start-up .
They recently moved from New York to Palo Alto , California , to see if they could make a go of their start-up idea – a style-oriented photo-sharing site with a twist .
But just shoving some ads and affiliate links onto the page didn ’ t make much sense to these 24-year-olds , so they applied a little bit of business-model smarts rather than technical innovation , and looked for ways to involve clothing vendors in their community .
Thus was born Weardrobe .
Call it Netflix-meets-fashion-show-meets-Flickr : Young women post photos of themselves and their “ looks ” and get style inspiration from others .
It &apos;s real people wearing real clothing .
The most influential users get a direct line to the brands , and starting next week will be able to borrow the latest fashion releases from the Weardrobe closet .
Some vendors , such as American Apparel , have already seen the value of their clothes being modeled by real people , and have started showcasing their products by linking to photos of Weardrobe users .
In a few weeks , Xie and Tong hope to announce a retail partnership .
The most trusted and active members will get to borrow , wear , and pose in clothing from this brand .
The sooner they return the items , they sooner they get a new item . Of course , this will add complexity and logistical challenges to the business , but it ’ s also likely to add revenue to the bottom line .
And for brands , it ’ s an opportunity to place product directly in the hands of fashion influencers .
Product placement has traditionally been seen as a way to get celebrities and models to wear branded clothing , but Weardrobe believes in the power of what Xie calls “ micro product placement . ” She says , “ This sort of micro product placement takes the success of Dove ’ s Campaign for Real Beauty a step further , allowing clothing companies to reach young women whom others follow .
Imagine having a bunch of real girls who like a brand so much that they wear and style it for free ! ”
And , of course , aspiring models and stylists will see Weardrobe as a place to be discovered ( just as MySpace and YouTube have become such places for performers ) .
My point here is not to predict Weardrobe ’ s success , but to show the kind of creativity and experimentation that makes California such a great place to visit after six months in Russia and a week in New York .
Each marketer needs to think of a message and a platform appropriate to its niche .
Financial firms are sponsoring sites such as Wesabe and Mint.com , where users supply their own financial data and get relevant , extremely targeted advice from vendors .
RealAge does the same for consumers .
Its advertising base is a little heavy on vitamin supplements , since pharmaceutical companies are extremely constrained in how they can advertise .
And it needn ’ t be just online .
The companies that are sponsoring power outlets in airports are another example of this kind of creativity .
They are sponsoring something of value and something relevant to their core customer base . Meetup ( I should disclose that I am on its board ) is a company that lets marketers sponsor face-to-face get-togethers of like-minded people : Huggies ( diapers ) sponsors stay-at-home Meetups and offers free diapers ; American Express sponsors small-business Meetups and helps covers members ’ fees .
Of course , it ’ s neither easy nor obvious . Advertisers are looking for one big idea .
But that ’ s the point .
Media are fragmenting , and so are advertising and marketing platforms . Advertisers will need to work harder to get the attention of their core audience . What they still don ’ t understand is that consumers don ’ t want just to give attention ; they want to get attention .
In these new communities sponsored by brands , it ’ s possible for them to get attention from other members while reflecting a little glory onto the brands that sponsor them .
Advise and Relent
WASHINGTON , DC – Dropping bombs as a solution to the world ’ s trouble spots may be falling out of fashion ( with the notable exception of Libya ) , but finger wagging is definitely back in .
Hardly a day goes by without a major newspaper somewhere in the West offering sage and specific , but often not-so-friendly , advice to distant struggling democracies on what they “ must ” do to earn the “ international community ’ s ” approbation .
Of course , such advice , like much of newspapers themselves nowadays , comes free of charge .
But it is also advice that is free of responsibility , and , as Stanley Baldwin once said , power without responsibility is the prerogative of the harlot .
There is a considerable gap between offers of advice one cannot refuse and the responsibility to deal with the consequences when that advice proves wrong or extremely difficult to implement .
The world ’ s advice givers might try to keep this in mind when offering to help leaders of distant countries that are grappling with problems with which the adviser has little or no first-hand experience .
Every once in a while , a profession ( most frequently , economics ) determines that it has reached a consensus on how to solve a problem .
The so-called “ Washington Consensus ” that held sway before the recent financial crisis was a good example .
In the case of nascent democracies , the formula that is now often made compulsory is this : lift all bans on political activities , liberalize the media , hold elections ( the sooner , the better ) , resolve all minority issues in favor of the minorities , abandon trade barriers , and rid the country of corruption , preferably overnight .
New governments are urged to tackle all of these problems immediately and simultaneously , lest they lose “ momentum ” and begin backsliding .
The subtext is clear : be like us now .
How to do this is left up to the new leaders , who are often credited with goodness and powers of persuasion they never had and never will have .
In many cases , the cohesiveness of opposition movements that come to power in the wake of a political upheaval may not be what the international media presume it to be .
Indeed , some components of these so-called “ democratic coalitions ” may not be democratic at all .
Some leaders , such as Nelson Mandela , rise to the historic occasion , against all odds .
Others , such as Kazakhstan ’ s Nursultan Nazarbayev ( popular with Western media when he first came on the scene ) plainly has not .
How can we help ensure these movements ’ sustainability in such fluid moments ?
Modesty is a virtue in private life .
It should also be a guide in dispensing political advice .
I would start by keeping in mind that some countries ’ capacity to absorb advice is limited , so it should be offered in smaller portions .
Where to start ?
The most important and potentially sustaining feature of a new democracy lies in its effort to commit itself to observing international human-rights standards .
In fact , there is a large body of literature that indicates that even countries in the aftermath of internal conflict can reach a higher level of compliance with these standards .
But human rights should not be conflated with democracy .
While democracy is , no doubt , the form of governance that best preserves human rights , the two are not the same thing .
Human rights will not co-exist with dictatorship , or with any other non-democracy , for long .
Setting standards and goals of human rights is a powerful signal that a country is pointing itself in the right direction .
The country is in effect announcing that it is moving toward democratic institutional arrangements .
Banning torture , complying with international standards of prisoners ’ rights , and enshrining rights of association and public assembly all immediately come to mind .
The embrace of essential human-rights standards as a cornerstone of a country ’ s development is one of our era ’ s seminal innovations .
The notion that a dictator can claim the sovereign right to abuse his people has become unacceptable .
A country that makes progress on human rights and commits to the change of behavior required to meet these international standards can also make a decisive turn toward a better future .
We should therefore focus on meeting international human-rights standards as a goal that a new democracy “ must ” ( to use a favorite word of Western editorial writers ) move toward quickly .
But we should not confuse these values with the other essential elements of progress , such as establishing liberalized trade regimes , creating institutional structures with a separation of powers , and rooting out corruption .
These are absolute necessities for democratic success , but they require longer-term development of institutional capacity .
Corruption , for example , may have cultural antecedents and is part and parcel of institutional weakness .
In most cases , neither can be remedied overnight .
Above all , we need to show patience with the new governments of the countries we hope to see evolving toward democracy , and avoid the tendency to expect instant gratification .
A few months of politics will never overcome a few centuries of sociology .
So , as we watch and wait , we need to be as supportive – but not overbearing – as possible .
A European Cure for Balkan Depression
VIENNA – European politics is mostly shaped by events and anniversaries .
But while events are often unforeseeable , anniversaries are not .
Five years from now , Europe will be reflecting on the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of World War 1 , which led to a loss of life almost without parallel and set in motion a chain of events that led to the creation of Europe as we now know it .
World leaders may have already reserved some days in August 2014 to mark the occasion .
It is easy to predict that Sarajevo will be the place where they will meet to look back on Europe ’ s savage twentieth century .
But how will Sarajevo look in five years ?
Will it still be the capital of a country whose citizens view the future bleakly and whose politicians have totally lost touch with the electorate ?
Or is there a hope that European leaders will use the anniversary to announce the successful integration of the remaining Balkan countries into the European Union ?
A Balkan Monitor survey recently conducted by Gallup Europe gives suggests the state of public opinion in Serbia , Montenegro , Macedonia , Albania , Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Kosovo 20 years on from the fall of the Berlin Wall and a decade after the end of the Kosovo war .
The findings seem to indicate that the next five years will be a make-or-break period for the region ’ s future development .
While the overwhelming majority of citizens are convinced that further armed conflict in the region is unlikely , the public ’ s mood – with the exception of Kosovars and Albanians – is pessimistic .
The future promises peace without development .
Trust in political elites and in national and European institutions has been steadily declining .
The majority of citizens have experienced a decline in living standards in the last year , and there remains a perception that people have more opportunities outside their own countries .
Pessimism about employment is alarmingly high among young people , while corruption and government mismanagement are regarded as being widespread .
All those who have made it their job to praise the stability in the region should look at these figures .
Indeed , it is striking that the majority of citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina believe that their leaders are not interested in their country joining the EU .
An absolute majority of citizens in each of the surveyed countries are convinced that their country is heading in the wrong direction .
Less than one in 10 Croats ( whose country could be joining the EU in the near future ) believes that their country is heading in the right direction .
There are now two options for the region : one is a “ shock integration ” program that takes all of the Western Balkan states into the EU ; the other is a journey into the unknown .
The hope that these countries can muddle through on their own is a dangerous illusion .
Stability alone can no longer be the EU ’ s only objective in the region .
The EU ’ s continuing presence as a colonial power in places like Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo could cause even more problems in the future , especially if benefits are not forthcoming .
In particular , a delay in Serbia ’ s integration into the EU could bring Tito-inspired fantasies to the heart of the country ’ s foreign and security policy .
Thus , demoralization of Balkan society creates a dynamic of its own when the best and the brightest see their future outside of their own countries and where “ stability ” is just another name for political and economic stagnation .
If European leaders do plan to meet in 2014 in Sarajevo , they should act now .
The ratification of the Lisbon Treaty allows for an element of visionary realism in European politics , as there are no longer any institutional obstacles to the future enlargement of the EU .
Today , unlike a year ago , we know how many states are in the Balkans , and the Balkan Monitor results show that all of them want to join the Union .
What the EU has learned from the results of the last parliamentary elections in Bulgaria is that , contrary to conventional wisdom , the leverage of Brussels over new member states increases rather than diminishes after they join .
The EU ’ s decision to liberalize its visa regime for Serbia , Montenegro , and Macedonia – and the fact that George Papandreou , the major architect of the EU ’ s Balkan integration strategy , is back in power in Greece – is another source of optimism .
But it is now or never for the Balkans .
Visa liberalization can be a strategic step in the direction of “ shock integration , ” but if it is not followed by bold political action from the EU , it could merely become a re-packaging of the status quo .
In short , the moment has arrived for shaping events instead of simply marking anniversaries .
A European Disease
CHICAGO : Many intellectuals in the United States and Eastern Europe believe that West European social welfare policies should be a blueprint for action in their own countries .
But those policies are financed by high taxes and costly mandates on business that are mainly responsible for the enormous increase in European unemployment during the past decade and a half .
This &quot; European disease &quot; cannot be cured until members of the European Union recognize it as potentially fatal .
In the late 1970s , unemployment was under 5 percent in France , Germany , and most other Western European nations .
It is now closer to 12 percent in France and Germany , and perhaps 20 percent in Spain .
The average rate for those under age 25 exceeds 25 percent in most members of the European Union .
By contrast , unemployment in the United States has not increased during the past fifteen years , presently is only 5.5 percent , and is only about 12 percent for young workers .
The United States ’ experience shows that the growth in European unemployment is not due simply to greater competition from the less developed world or to other forces that affected all advanced countries equally .
The rapid growth of labor costs throughout Europe appears to have been a principle cause of its explosion in unemployment .
More than one-third of Germany ’ s and France ’ s average labor costs results from social security , health , unemployment compensation , disability , and other taxes ; other European nations have similar shares .
Regulations that restrict layoffs and mandate numerous vacation days and other paid leaves raise Europe ’ s cost of labor far above the excessive level due to their heavy taxes .
Generous leaves for sickness and other reasons had increased Sweden ’ s and Germany ’ s absenteeism rates to almost 10 percent , compared with 2 percent to 3 percent in Japan and the United States .
To reduce costs , many European companies increasingly resort to temporary workers , because they are easy to dismiss and do not qualify for fringe benefits and taxes .
In Spain , where it is almost impossible to fire workers on the regular payroll , about one-third of employees are temporary .
Even in France and Germany , perhaps 10 percent or more of workers are temps .
Europe ’ s underground economy has grown rapidly , in part because it provides a way to escape government-imposed employee costs .
Although no reliable figures on this sector exist , crude estimates suggest perhaps 25 percent of all Italian and Spanish workers work underground at least part of the time as do 10 percent of those in Belgium , France , Germany , and Sweden .
When labor is expensive and firing employees is difficult , companies are reluctant either to replace departing workers or to expand employment when the economy picks up .
This is why it now takes much longer than a decade ago to find a job in Europe if you are a young job seeker , a mother returning to work after childbirth , or an immigrant .
Those out of work for over a year have grown to more than one-third of the unemployed .
For the same reasons , private employment in the European Union has barely increased during the past two decades : The public sector has accounted for almost all the growth in employment .
By contrast , Japan and the United States private employment has surged , while government employment has grown little .
The long-term unemployed , youths who never had a steady job , temporary employees , and underground workers , have little opportunity to invest in job skills and training .
The sharp growth in these categories means that fewer workers are being trained in European economies .
This inadequate training makes it still harder for workers to find satisfactory long-term jobs since modern economies demand high levels of skill and knowledge .
Teenagers , high school dropouts , and immigrants frequently find employment in small establishments , especially in fast-food chains and other retail sectors .
Increasing the minimum wage puts some of them out of work since their productivity is too low to justify the cost to employers .
Recent studies of minimum wages in the United States claim no negative effects on employment , and perhaps even positive effects , but these studies have been shown to be based on deeply flawed evidence .
A reanalysis of their evidence , as well as other evidence , continues to show sizable reductions in employment of teenagers and others with limited skills when minimum wages increase significantly .
Yet some Europeans governments , in misguided attempts to raise incomes and spending , have foolishly increased their minimum wages - the conservative French government this past summer raised the minimum to over $ 7 per hour .
Even those American economists who believe that a slightly higher minimum for the United States - it is presently $ 4.25 per hour - would not have much effect on employment probably agree that a $ 7 per hour minimum would have large effects on the opportunities of teenagers and others with few skills .
Sometimes the need for a higher rate of pay is justified by noting that a family cannot live decently on minimum wage earnings .
However , raising the minimum is not an effective way to reduce poverty since poor families typically get only a small fraction of their income from members whose wages are near the minimum .
The French government is also subsidizing the employment in both the private and public sectors of hundreds of thousands of mainly young unqualified workers .
However , most of these expensive and inefficient subsidies would be unnecessary if the minimum wage were much lower , and if French labor markets were much freer .
Government regulations and transfer payments , not company needs , also explain the sharp fall in European labor-force participation rates of men aged 60 to 65 - from about 80 percent in the 1960s to under 50 percent in many European countries now .
Realization of eligibility requirements for disability pay and generous Social Security benefits induced many older workers to take early retirement .
Why keep working if you can get almost as much income by retiring and collecting pensions from the French , German , or other governments ?
It is paradoxical that although older persons are much healthier and living considerably longer than they did fifty years ago , government policies have driven most of them out of work into retirement .
Since many of the elderly have much to contribute to the economy through their experience and judgment , their choice between work and retirement should not be skewed and biased by government mandates and financial incentives .
Taxes and death may be inevitable , but not the degree of taxation and regulation prevailing in France and other European nations .
A large dent will not be made in the disgracefully high unemployment and low employment until European social policies are recognized for what they are : A serious disease that badly infects their labor markets .
A European New Deal
FLORENCE / ANN ARBOR – The eurozone has reached a crossroads .
European policy prescriptions have proven inadequate , and there is no consensus on the right balance of fiscal consolidation and economic stimulus – or on how much fiscal solidarity a functioning monetary union requires .
Disagreement over Eurobonds exemplifies the European Union ’ s current dilemma .
Overstretched sovereign borrowers on the eurozone periphery argue that issuing government securities backed by all eurozone countries is the only way out of their “ debt trap . ”
But , without common economic governance , northern Europeans contend , mutualization of debt would encourage free-riding by debtor countries .
In fact , both sides are right .
So , in order to neutralize moral hazard , northern European countries seek a guarantee that their profligate peripheral neighbors maintain discipline , reflected in steps taken toward greater Europe-wide governance of national fiscal policies .
Indeed , EU leaders are focusing on more European rules to discipline national governments .
But , even if fiscal discipline is achieved , it will not be enough to fortify the monetary union .
Indeed , a country ’ s fiscal position depends on its broader economic environment and , in particular , on its trade balance .
A monetary union cannot comprise only states running trade surpluses ; hard times demand costly transfers .
Moreover , a system that focuses almost exclusively on EU rules imposed on its member countries to guarantee a well-functioning monetary union is politically unsustainable .
Either national democratic processes will prevail , rendering the rules ineffective , or the rules will be strictly enforced , and the limits that they impose on national political systems risk plunging democracy itself into crisis .
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is correct that “ more Europe , not less ” is the only solution .
But this requires even more than she is willing to concede .
In fact , the way out of the euro crisis is a New Deal for Europe , with governance at its heart .
Europe ’ s transfer union must give way to a genuine fiscal union , which implies EU resources and policies that are sufficient to correct the monetary union ’ s inevitable asymmetries .
Consider the United States , the world ’ s most well-known , and arguably most successful , currency union .
It became an “ optimal currency area ” only in the 1930 ’ s , when the federal government gained the power to ease asymmetric shocks , for example , by conducting fiscal transfers .
To be sure , Europe ’ s New Deal would not require a US level of governance .
But certain powers are crucial , including an effective unemployment-insurance system , meaningful Europe-wide policies that create positive incentives for national governments , and structural transfers from the EU to member states linked to those policies .
To accomplish this , Europe needs its own resources , funded by taxes levied on EU-related economic activity and bonds guaranteed through the EU budget .
The New Deal ’ s second crucial ingredient is politics .
While European governance will naturally take on more political relevance , as politics follows power and money , Europe ’ s leaders must take an active role .
Political decisions and institutional changes must be salient to voters in Europe-wide elections .
To this end , European parliamentary elections must be augmented by a genuine electoral competition for President of the European Commission .
This would give the position real political capital , provide legitimacy to EU spending , and catalyze a fundamental shift in citizens ’ perceptions of integration .
Rather than arguing for or against Europe , political contestants would debate contrasting visions of Europe .
To reach that point , however , Europeans must acknowledge that their house is on fire .
If the EU ’ s member countries do not act together to put it out , it will only spread – consuming the common currency and threatening the European project of “ ever closer union . ”
Only a true political and fiscal union can legitimate the level of interdependence and solidarity that a monetary union requires .
European leaders , when told that what is needed is also politically impossible , should remember that in the past saving Europe required making the impossible possible .
Indeed , they should summon the spirit of Jean Monnet , an EU founding father who saw opportunity in every crisis .
Just as Monnet forged ahead in the dire conditions of post-war Europe ’ s ravaged economies and societies , so today ’ s leaders should take advantage of the current crisis to establish a New Deal for Europe – and a new vision of Europe ’ s future .
A European Opening for the Arab World
BERLIN – The people of Tunisia and Egypt have shown that democracy in Arab countries need not come at the barrel of a Western gun .
But , while the drive for democratic change has been local and authentic , there is no guarantee of a successful political transition : democratically elected governments will have to address the same social and economic problems that contributed to the old regimes ’ fall – not least the need to create jobs and opportunities for the young .
This will be impossible without external support .
Given the myriad links between the European Union countries and the Mediterranean ’ s southern rim , Europe must not miss this opportunity .
So far , the EU has offered to support democratization in Tunisia and Egypt by helping to organize free and fair elections , establish political parties , and reform the police , courts , and local administrations .
But such political-administrative support is not enough .
Nor is a Marshall Plan-type program of grand investments sufficient .
This is not to discount the need for such projects ; the renewable-energy sector , in particular , holds enormous opportunities for cooperation .
Europe needs clean energy , and will not be able to produce enough on its own territory .
The countries of North Africa also need energy – particularly more electricity and new networks to support urban and industrial development .
Indeed , the availability of uninterrupted electricity often makes the difference between , say , a shoemaker ’ s workshop and a shoe factory .
And these countries have the most suitable environment for solar thermal power production .
According to some optimistic studies , solar thermal power plants and wind farms in North Africa could not only boost economic growth there , but also provide more than 15 % of Europe ’ s electricity by 2050 .
Obviously , cooperation agreements and private investment in this sector should be encouraged .
The problem is that such long-term investments bring results only in the medium and long term .
They do not address today ’ s social or economic problems , nor do they signal a new society-oriented approach by Europe towards its Mediterranean neighbors .
New EU programs should mainly aim at strengthening the specific capacities of Tunisia , Egypt , and others , and seek opportunities that benefit both sides of the Mediterranean .
Catherine Ashton , the EU ’ s vice-president and high representative for foreign affairs and security policy , has proposed a Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean , which contains a host of useful measures , including facilitation of visas for students , academics , and business people .
But , to make this scheme more concrete , I would suggest augmenting it with a “ pact for labor and skills ” between the EU and the Arab countries that choose a path to democratic transformation .
Europe , while afraid of illegal migration , needs foreign labor for its own demographic reasons – not least young engineers , technical staff , doctors , and health-care workers .
Tunisia , Egypt , and the other Southern Mediterranean countries have an abundance of young people with degrees and no jobs , who often also need to acquire practical skills .
This is most urgent for the Arab world ’ s baby boomers – those between 20 and 35 .
The next generation is already smaller .
As a practical step , the EU and its member states should offer 30,000 visas and work permits annually for graduates from participating Mediterranean countries .
Such a program would include , first , a traineeship in European firms , followed by the opportunity to work in Europe for 5-8 years .
At the end of that period , participants would receive soft business-startup loans from European development banks to create employment in their countries of origin .
Designed for at least a 15-year period , such a program would be a strong signal in itself .
It would show young people from Tunisia , Egypt , and other transformation countries that there are other options than getting on a boat to the Italian island of Lampedusa .
It would be a real incentive to finish one ’ s university education ( indeed , it should be augmented by investment in vocational schools , technical high-schools , and universities in North Africa and the Middle East ) .
Once implemented , the labor pact would help to change attitudes towards Arab immigrants in Europe – and Europe ’ s image in the Southern Mediterranean .
It would likely create lasting ties between people and economies .
And it would address real needs in the Southern Mediterranean countries – improving professional skills , reducing the pressure on the local labor market , creating businesses and jobs – as well as in Europe .
Some warn against any programs for “ temporary ” or “ circular ” migration .
To be sure , some who benefit would want to stay .
But , while this “ burden ” might , in fact , benefit aging European countries , the risk is relatively low in the first place : Arab countries entering such a pact would be better governed than they were under the previous regimes .
If they become consolidated democracies , as hoped , would-be entrepreneurs could stop worrying so much about official corruption .
And start-up loans from Europe would make it much easier to seek one ’ s fortune back home .
Such an approach needs to be communicated both to the European public and to the people of Tunisia , Egypt , and other Arab countries .
It would reverse the pattern whereby Europe relies on repressive regimes to supply it with oil and gas and guard its borders against migrants .
At long last , these countries ’ demographic wealth would be used to meet their development needs .
Closing Europe ’ s Strategy Gap
MADRID – The ongoing crisis in Ukraine has been a hot topic of analysis for almost a year .
But one question has largely escaped thorough examination : what Russia ’ s annexation of Crimea and invasion of eastern Ukraine indicates about the European Union ’ s foreign policy .
During the early stages of the crisis , Germany , which had bet heavily on Russia ’ s modernization , was averse to taking any consequential action .
But , as the crisis deepened , German Chancellor Angela Merkel worked to persuade her European counterparts to implement a broad and biting sanctions regime .
This certainly was a step in the right direction , but it did nothing to address the foreign-policy failings that helped spark the Ukrainian crisis and continue to undermine Europe ’ s response – namely , the EU ’ s misguided Neighborhood Policy ( ENP ) and its muddled approach to energy .
On both of these fronts , the EU ’ s lack of strategic vision has created the impression that Europe is repeatedly being outmaneuvered by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
It increasingly appears that Ukraine is becoming locked in a “ frozen conflict ” – Russia ’ s foreign-policy specialty .
Indeed , the situation in Ukraine represents a tactical victory for Russia , with the fragile but enduring ceasefire – and accompanying legislation that grants Donetsk and Luhansk considerable political autonomy – allowing Russia to entrench the conflict near the EU ’ s border .
Moreover , the delayed implementation of key elements of the EU ’ s association agreement with Ukraine is clear evidence that , at the moment , Russia dictates the terms of EU-Ukrainian engagement .
In Europe , the Kremlin has been able to pursue a successful divide-and-rule strategy , particularly in view of Hungary ’ s decision to suspend gas flows to Ukraine .
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán ’ s government , whose behavior in recent years has been at odds with the EU ’ s criteria for democracy , now openly approves of authoritarian regimes – and Putin ’ s , in particular – with serious potential consequences for European unity .
Nonetheless , the timing of the current ceasefire , which coincides with the installation of a new EU Commission , is advantageous , as is Putin ’ s shortsighted emphasis on tactical victories .
EU leaders should take advantage of the break in the fighting to stop reacting and start anticipating .
With a long-term strategic vision , the EU could overwhelm and ultimately undermine Putin ’ s short-term successes .
Such a vision must include a reconceptualization of the ENP .
The program ’ s mission – to help guide the political , social , and economic transitions of neighboring states – is not inherently problematic ; the problem lies in the way that the mission has been interpreted and pursued .
For starters , the ENP assumes that all of the EU ’ s neighbors , both in the south and in the east , ultimately want to realize European values and structures in their own countries .
In other words , the ENP does not account for the developmental , cultural , and aspirational differences among the EU ’ s partner countries .
The ENP suffers operationally from its excessively technical approach and lack of strategic vision .
For example , before the Ukraine crisis , the European Commission was so focused on negotiating the technical features of the association agreement that it did not consider adequately the potential fallout of the process – such as , say , a response from Russia .
To be sure , the EU recognized its need for a coherent strategy , and attempted to resolve it by establishing the European External Action Service and the position of High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
But the EEAS ended up in a turf war with the European Commission , and outgoing High Representative Catherine Ashton did little to ease the tension , owing to her unwillingness to involve herself in intra-EU disagreements .
It is telling that Ashton has made progress exclusively in areas defined by ample consensus , such as the negotiations on Iran ’ s nuclear program and the pact between Kosovo and Serbia .
Further eroding Europe ’ s effectiveness is its fragmented approach to securing energy supplies .
With every country largely controlling its own energy policy , Europe ’ s energy market has become inefficient and excessively dependent on Russian supplies .
To the extent that there has been an EU-wide energy strategy , it has related to renewables , rather than the intersection of geopolitics and energy security .
But there is reason for hope .
The new Commission , which its president , Jean Claude Juncker , has restructured significantly , could provide Europe with the strategic leadership it so badly needs .
In fact , Juncker has already expressed a desire to integrate incoming High Representative Federica Mogherini into the Commission ’ s policy program .
The new structure – which tasks Mogherini with guiding and coordinating the work of multiple commissioners , including those responsible for trade , the ENP , and climate and energy – should strengthen the coherence and direction of EU policies , particularly after Mogherini completes her European Council-mandated assessment of the global strategic landscape .
But a restructured Commission is not enough to ensure a reset of Europe ’ s foreign-policy strategy .
For that to happen , Mogherini must assert herself as a leader , backed by Juncker and the new European Council president , Donald Tusk .
And , most important , all EU member states must recommit themselves to cooperation .
The Ukrainian people have demonstrated the power of Europe ’ s values .
Indeed , Europe has a large set of tools at its disposal ; it just needs to figure out how to use them .
If it can , it will be better able to respond not only to the Russian challenge , but also to many of the other challenges that characterize today ’ s rapidly shifting global environment .
A Europe for All
Longtime members of the European Union now seem to doubt the Union ’ s future , but we in Ukraine look at the European Union with hope and admiration .
To join in the EU ’ s progress is the basic object of our foreign policy , for Ukraine has discovered that nationhood is not an end , but a beginning .
Indeed , European unity is indivisible : when one nation is ostracized , all are not free .
We Europeans are caught in an inescapable net , tied in a single garment of destiny .
Every aspect of our shared culture , if not the last century of shared suffering , confirms that for us .
Whatever affects one European directly , affects all indirectly .
Never again can we afford to live with the narrow notion of two Europes , of haves and have-nots , of insiders and outsiders .
Anyone who lives within the European continent cannot – indeed , must not – be considered a stranger to its Union .
Today ’ s great Pax Europa and today ’ s pan-European prosperity depend on this .
Of course , some people mutter that Ukraine is not Europe .
Let them come to Kyiv and speak to the people , young and old , factory worker , farmer ’ s wife , the lawyers and doctors and teachers who stood and stayed in the cold and snow for weeks on end last winter to defend their freedoms .
Are they not united with those who stood alongside General de Gaulle in the French Resistance ?
Are they not one with those who died fighting for the Spanish Republic in the 1930 ’ s , who liberated Budapest in 1956 and ended fascism in Spain and Portugal in the 1970 ’ s ?
Are they not animated by the same spirit as Poland ’ s Solidarity and the peaceful masses that created Prague ’ s Velvet Revolution in 1989 ?
That is the true European spirit , and no doubts can crush it .
To those who say that Ukraine is too backward for EU membership , I say : Let them , too , come to my country and see the mothers who stay late at night at work teaching their children to use their workplace computer .
Let them come to the language classes in every village and city where young people are readying themselves for Europe by learning French and German and English.Those who doubt Ukraine ’ s European vocation should understand that Europe is not a matter of hardware and superhighways ; it is the unquenchable desire for freedom , prosperity , and solidarity .
I believe that our future is as promising as Europe ’ s past is proud , and that our destiny lies not as a forgotten borderland on a troubled region , but as a maker and shaper of Europe ’ s peace and Europe ’ s unity .
Self-determination no longer means isolation , because achieving national independence nowadays means only to return to the world scene with a new status .
New nations can build with their former occupiers the same kind of fruitful relationship that France established with Germany – a relationship founded on equality and mutual interests .
That is the type of relationship that my government seeks with Russia , and achieving it is how we can help extend the zone of Europe ’ s peace .
Of course , it is premature to do more than indicate the high regard with which we view the prospect of EU membership .
We know that our part in that great edifice will not be built overnight .
We know that the great works of European unification lay not in documents and declarations , but in innovative action designed to better the lives and insure the security of all Europeans .
Building a Ukraine worthy of EU membership will not be easy , cheap , or fast .
But , like the Union itself , it will be built and it will be done .
We know the challenge is great , but the prize is worth the struggle , and Europe should know that this is our goal .
Part of the work of renewing Ukraine is a creative battle to put an end to a nightmarish century during which fascism and communism – ideologies born in the heart of Europe – battled for mastery .
Only a few months ago , in cities throughout Ukraine , our children and our parents confronted armed troops , snarling dogs , and even death .
Only a few years ago , a young journalist , Georgi Gongadze , seeking to inform the public about our old regime ’ s corruption , was brutalized and beheaded by that regime ’ s thugs .
But our Orange Revolution last winter shows that Ukraine ’ s people prevailed .
So , despite today ’ s doubts and difficulties , I retain an abiding faith in Europe .
I refuse to accept despair as the final response to the ambiguities and horrors of Ukraine ’ s history .
I refuse to accept the view that Ukraine is so tragically bound to the starless midnight of communism ’ s legacy that we can never see the bright daybreak of peace and true European unity .
When the EU ’ s citizens ponder Ukraine ’ s place in Europe , they should look both beyond and more closely at the face they see .
They should look beyond the ravaged wastelands that communism inflicted , beyond the poverty , and beyond the social divisions through which our discarded ex-leaders sought to prolong their misrule .
Instead , they should look closely at the face of our president , Viktor Yushchenko , ravaged by poison during last year ’ s election campaign , and recall the words of the great Frenchman André Malraux , for whom “ the most beautiful faces are those that have been wounded . ”
A Europe of Judges
MAYNOOTH , IRELAND – As the Greek financial drama reaches its sorry dénouement , another crisis looms for the European project – this time in Germany , beginning with a case now before Germany ’ s Constitutional Court .
Away from the rarefied atmosphere of EU summits ( which , so far , have been shaping the Union ’ s response to events in Greece ) , other institutional actors have been – and are – shaping the EU system .
In particular , courts have driven European integration forward as much as politicians have .
The powerful European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) , in particular , has frequently been criticized for using European law to disguise an integrationist agenda .
Without the ECJ ’ s doctrines of “ direct effect ” and “ primacy , ” and without national courts that are willing to enforce these doctrines in their own jurisdictions , the EU most likely would not have attained the level of integration that it has .
National courts may consider the effects of European integration on their constitutional and democratic institutions , affirming or rejecting the integration that has already taken place , or setting limits to supranational arrangements that might further impinge on national sovereignty .
This is significant , because , in May 2010 , a group of prominent German economists , led by Joachim Starbatty , commenced litigation before the German Constitutional Court in which they argued that the EU ’ s assistance to Greece and Europe ’ s new financial rescue fund violated Article 125 , the EU treaty ’ s so-called “ no bailout ” clause .
The Court will begin hearing the case on July 5 .
Germany ’ s Constitutional Court has been among the most prominent in declaring what it considers to be the appropriate limits to EU integration , consistent with the country ’ s Basic Law ( constitution ) .
In a number of landmark judgments , the Court has expressed skepticism about any move toward a federal EU .
In 1993 , when ruling on the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty , the judges expressed clear reservations about the direction of the European integration process .
Their main argument was that the shortcomings of EU-level democratic practices required the German Bundestag to retain a substantial number of policy competences .
For the same reason , the competence to decide upon the further allocation of competences had to remain a prerogative of the German state and could not be transferred to the EU .
Crucially , the Court also asserted its authority to invalidate European laws if found by the judges to lack a basis in the European treaties .
In another landmark ruling in June 2009 , the Court made Germany ’ s ratification of the Lisbon Treaty conditional upon the passage of new legislation giving the Bundestag enhanced powers of scrutiny over European affairs .
The Court relied on the same constitutional doctrines and conceptions of sovereignty elaborated in its Maastricht judgment .
Now the court in Karlsruhe will have to determine whether the EU ’ s recently agreed European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) is consistent with the Basic Law .
The risk that the judges could rule the ESM illegal played no small part in efforts made in recent months by Chancellor Angela Merkel and President Nicolas Sarkozy to bind the EU to a revised and more intrusive economic governance framework , effected through an amendment to the existing treaties .
The debate on sovereignty in Germany and other EU member states has been re-ignited not just by the debt crisis , but also by a string of controversial rulings by the ECJ , most notably the Court ’ s interpretation of the freedoms of establishment and service delivery articulated in its Viking , Laval , and Ruffert decisions .
The discontent within Germany with the cumulative impact of these decisions has been expressed publicly by some of the country ’ s most trusted public representatives .
In September 2008 , for example , former President Roman Herzog published a polemic entitled “ Stop the ECJ ! ”
He accused the Luxembourg judges of grabbing ever-greater competences at the expense of the member states and urged the Constitutional Court to invalidate several controversial ECJ rulings .
Herzog ’ s broadside resonated across Europe , where for some time there has been considerable disquiet about “ judicial activism ” and what some see as an irreversible trend toward empowerment of the ECJ and other EU institutions .
In many member states , the ECJ ’ s decisions have produced a backlash , especially on the left , with trade unions and social movements targeting the Court ’ s alleged zeal in siding with business over workers interests .
Such arguments were deployed successfully during the 2005 referenda on the Constitutional Treaty in France and the Netherlands , and in Ireland during the referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Indeed , the threat to the EU legal order does not lie solely with the German Constitutional Court .
In Ireland , an embattled austerity-driven coalition government might well have no choice but to hold a referendum on the European Stability Mechanism .
It is almost certain that Euro-skeptic groups will ask the Irish Supreme Court to rule on the constitutionality of the ESM .
The Irish government has stated emphatically that any amendments to the Lisbon Treaty connected to eurozone reforms will not require a referendum .
Its reasoning seems to be that the proposed changes fall far short of what the Supreme Court ’ s case law demands , and that the ESM does not alter the EU ’ s essential scope or objectives .
If the Irish Supreme Court were to decide that the ESM requires popular consent , the EU would be faced with the prospect of yet another Irish referendum on Europe .
Thus , Ireland might yet play as significant a part as Germany in determining the future of any amendments to the EU constitutional order , with each country ’ s top court playing as important a role as politicians in shaping Europe ’ s future .
A Europe of Provinces , Not States
As the European Constitutional Convention assembles to debate the fine points of the European Union &apos;s future institutions , now is the moment to think the unthinkable about where Europe is heading .
Or at least , to consider perhaps a quite different question : where would it be reasonable for the EU to move ?
Communism &apos;s fall saw the appearance of several small states in Europe .
Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania reemerged from Soviet occupation .
Czechoslovakia split into two separate states .
Yugoslavia gave way to Slovenia , Croatia , Bosnia , Serbia , Macedonia ; it may perhaps shortly disgorge Kosovo and Montenegro as well .
Although the Baltic republics merely reestablished their pre-WWII independence , and Yugoslavia &apos;s breakup was a bloody affair like so many other wars of independence , there is something tantalizing new in all this as well .
In the interwar years , the Baltic states were often viewed as impractical , artificial creations of the Great Powers .
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia came into existence because their constituent parts were not seen as viable independent states .
Why was this ?
Because 80 years ago , when Wilson , Clemenceau , and Lloyd George redrew the map of Europe , small states were dysfunctional in times of both war and peace .
To be viable , a state needed to be large enough to defend itself and to constitute a relatively self-contained economic market .
None of this holds true today .
With the prospect of entry into the EU , national markets matter less .
Both EU and NATO membership make war among European member states unthinkable , and an attack on even the smallest NATO member would bring a response from all NATO members .
Lacking such external threats , the ties between , say , Czechs and Slovaks ( to say nothing of Serbs and Croats ! ) are too weak to warrant a common national level of government .
Does this tell us something about the future of Europe as a whole ?
The difference between Czechoslovakia and Italy or Germany is mostly one of 50 years .
After all , wasn &apos;t Italy , until 1860s , a collection of kingdoms and principalities ?
Wasn &apos;t Germany &apos;s unification a matter of ``blood and iron &apos; &apos; ?
France and Spain are older , but is the marriage of Basques , Catalans , and Corsicans with their national states that much happier than the former Czech / Slovak marriage ?
Is there really that much reason why the Scots and Welsh should be part of the same national state as the English ?
Abstract for a second from the idea of French or German or Italian identity , patriotism , the collective memories of war and carnage that cemented the consciousness of today &apos;s linguistic communities and think of this : why do Europeans need an intermediate level of government , between the common European framework and their local institutions ?
Why do Piemontese , Bavarians , or Scots need intermediate national bureaucracies to run their tax policies , welfare programs , securities laws , and the largely useless , duplicative armies ?
Wouldn &apos;t life be easier if a common market , currency , foreign policy , army , and a few other things were run on a Europe-wide basis , with the rest left to more meaningful local units ?
It is fashionable to mock the bureaucratic minutia of European regulation .
But European regulation is as nothing compared to the mountains of national laws and decrees , billions wasted in political patronage , and the colossal state machines that eat up 30-40 % of the economic product of Europe &apos;s nation states .
Could any common European state do worse ?
Indeed , the creation of a European federal government and the elimination of national intermediaries would probably lead to the greatest liberalization of the economy ( and society as a whole ) in Europe &apos;s entire history .
Look at America in 1787 : creation of the federal government swept away the balkanized system of pre-revolutionary colonies , ushering in an era of entrepreneurial expansion across the entire American Continent .
The simple fact is that Europe as a whole is too diverse to be captured by the economic and political interest groups that now dominate national states .
It is only as an additional level of government that the EU appears onerous and bureaucratic .
If it were to displace national governments , its burden would be weightless in comparison to what exists today .
Nations also put Europe &apos;s constitutional balance out of kilter .
Germany and Italy are simply too big , as compared to Portugal or Belgium ( itself a rather questionable amalgam of the Flemish and the Walloons ) , and this creates the types of imbalances reminiscent of the heavy foot of Prussia in the old Bismarckian empire .
Could a federal Europe replace today &apos;s national identities ?
Could the French and the British feel as spiritually at home in ``Europe &apos; &apos; as they feel in their national states ?
No , but must they ?
When Europeans think of future institutions , the tension is always seen as that between national differences and the common European identity .
But what if common European institutions are not viewed through the prism of national institutions ?
What if the evolution of European consciousness proceeds not by an upward transfer of attachment to supranational institutions , but by a devolution of loyalties , and a revival of smaller , more meaningful , communities ?
Of course , the demise of national states is not imminent , but not because they are so deeply rooted in the consciousness of their citizens .
Indeed , national identities are mostly impoverishing abstractions , clichés , like race , class , and other ideological creations .
Think of how much more genuine diversity would there be in a united Europe if national states did not squat in the middle .
But Europe &apos;s nation states are not going to disappear for a while because they are centers of power .
After all , forty cents out of every euro of GDP is a lot to fight about .
If , however , Europeans gain a sense of where they should be going , perhaps in time the national identities forged in the last couple of hundred years ( for they are not much older than that ) will become like the appendix - a part of the human body responsible for little else but an occasional inflammation .
A Europe of Women ?
PARIS – Are women in Europe on the verge of becoming an engine for political change ?
In economic-development circles , experience and common sense suggest that progress , accountability , and hard work start with and depend on women .
Micro-credits , for example , are much more efficient when women receive and repay them .
Perhaps because they bear children and must find the means to feed them , women are now perceived as the best and most determined “ agents of change . ”
That seems to be as true now of European politics as it has been of economics in parts of Africa and Asia .
The results of Italy ’ s recent municipal elections could be a signal of an incipient electoral dynamic : it was women who voted Silvio Berlusconi ’ s party out of power in Milan , a city that he has long controlled ( and the original seat of his power ) .
No direct link exists between that result and the dramatic Dominique Strauss-Kahn scandal in New York , but in the immediate aftermath of DSK ’ s arrest , Italian women and young voters decisively mobilized to defeat Berlusconi ’ s party ( led in Milan , ironically , by a woman ) .
These voters could no longer stand the combination of machismo and vulgarity that had once served so well the man Italian humorists now call “ Berlus-Kahn . ”
When Berlusconi first came to power 17 years ago , he had the support of a majority of women .
They were not discouraged by his ambivalent perception of them ( by turns celebrating their traditional domesticity and glorifying their sexual objectification ) .
But Italian society has changed : most women are now working , and they are no longer willing to accept Belusconi ’ s anachronistic and outrageous chauvinism .
Italian men may pity the aging , isolated leader , who looks increasingly like his wax effigy at Madame Tussaud ’ s .
But Italian women ( indeed , women everywhere , it seems ) feel only anger and humiliation over a man so obsessed with himself , his various criminal trials , and his vulgar pleasures that he appears to them to have no purpose left except to remain in power as long as possible .
Women , of course , are not alone in their opposition to Berlusconi , but they made the difference in Milan .
They are the incarnation of modernity , animated by a yearning for simple dignity and respect .
They are not alone in the vanguard of a new Europe of women .
As Iceland spiraled into bankruptcy , owing the irresponsible behavior of its mostly male political and financial elites , the people of Iceland decided that only a strong and responsible woman could redress the country ’ s problems .
So they elected one as President .
The depth and gravity of the current economic and social crisis in countries like Greece , Portugal , and Spain present women with a new opportunity .
Confronted with what many of them perceive as the equivalent of an “ economic war , ” women are playing an increasingly important role in maintaining their families ’ financial security .
And the more widespread this becomes , the more women will seek a political role that reflects their economic clout .
Of course , women ’ s changing status may not translate immediately into growing political influence .
And the rest of Europe might never follow the example of Scandinavia , where gender equality has advanced much further than anywhere else .
But such a dynamic does now seem to be in motion .
Similarly , regardless of the outcome of DSK ’ s trial in New York , the case might represent a turning point in the treatment of women in Europe .
Public and private displays of atavistic machismo , one hopes , will no longer be considered acceptable .
In the Arab world , too , from Tunis to Cairo , young women have played an important role in the revolutionary process .
Their appetite for change – understandable , given the treatment of women in traditional Muslim societies – appears to be one of the main causes underlying the force of the revolutionary impulse in Tunisia and Egypt .
None of this is to argue that “ women ” are a universal force for positive change in Europe and around the world .
Consider , for example , Marine Le Pen , the new head of France ’ s National Front , Elena Ceaucescu , the sordid wife of the former Romanian dictator , or , more recently , Tunisian ex-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali ’ s wife , Leila Trabelsi , who fled to Dubai with 1.5 tons of gold plundered from the central bank .
The point , simply , is that with so many people in so many countries demanding far-reaching change , the politics of gender is very much in play – in Europe and beyond .
The main question is whether the growing number of women in politics will deliver the different perspectives and modes of leadership that many voters ( or protesters ) now seem to crave .
A Euro Sabbatical
MUNICH – Under substantial external pressure , the eurozone ’ s crisis-hit countries are , at long last , bringing themselves to make painful cuts in their government budgets .
Salaries are being slashed and public employees sacked to reduce new borrowing to a tolerable level .
And yet , competitiveness in Greece and Portugal , in particular , is not improving .
The latest Eurostat figures on the evolution of the price index for self-produced goods ( GDP deflator ) show no tendency whatsoever in the crisis-stricken countries towards real devaluation .
But real devaluation , achieved by lowering prices vis-à-vis their eurozone competitors , is the only way to re-establish these countries ’ competitiveness .
A reduction in unit labor costs can also increase competitiveness only to the extent that it actually results in price reductions .
After all , it was price inflation in the crisis countries , fueled by massive inflows of cheap credit following the introduction of the euro , that resulted in their loss of competitiveness , ballooning current-account deficits , and accumulation of enormous foreign debt .
Now that capital markets are no longer willing to finance these deficits , prices should be going into reverse , but this , obviously , is not happening .
In 2010 , inflation in some of the crisis countries lagged slightly behind that of their eurozone competitors .
The latest Eurostat figures for the third quarter of 2011 , however , are already showing a different picture : the price level in Portugal and Greece has remained practically unchanged over the course of the year , and in Italy and Spain it even rose slightly ( by 0.4 % and 0.3 % , respectively ) .
Only Ireland continued on a path of rapid deflation – as it has since the country ’ s real-estate bubble burst in 2006 – with a relative price decrease of 2.2 % .
On the whole , Ireland has become cheaper relative to its eurozone competitors by a total of 15 % over the course of the past five years .
This internal devaluation is paying off : while Ireland was still running a current-account deficit of 5.6 % of GDP in 2008 , the European Commission expects the outturn for 2011 to have been a 0.7 % -of-GDP current-account surplus .
True , much of this is mere debt-service relief , given that Ireland was able to repay its foreign liabilities with self-printed money , for which it pays only 1 % interest .
However , Ireland ’ s big trade surplus did improve further .
Ireland owes much of this turnaround to its efficient export sector , whose supporters were able to enforce a political U-turn .
Greece , on the other hand , is under the influence of a strong import lobby .
As the Greek economics minister , Michalis Chrysochoidis , has said , this is attributable to European Union subsidies , which drove entrepreneurs to follow the easy money into the import sector .
Now these importers form a powerful bulwark against any policy that causes deflation , even though lowering prices – and thereby redirecting Greek demand from foreign to domestic products and helping tourism – is the only way to put the Greek economy back on its feet .
Since Greece ’ s current-account deficit as a share of GDP was three times higher than Ireland ’ s , Greek prices would have to fall by about half to achieve the same kind of success .
It is inconceivable that Greece could manage that within the eurozone without widespread social unrest , if not conditions approaching those of civil war .
But it isn ’ t just importers who are blocking real devaluation .
Unions , too , are resisting the necessary wage reductions , and public and private debtors fear the prospect of insolvency if their assets and revenues are assessed at a lower value , while their debts remain unchanged .
The situation is intractable .
Many people regard debt relief and socialization of debts as the only way out .
This help has been given .
The recent agreement gave Greece relief of € 237 billion ( $ 316 billion ) , about 30 % more than Greece ’ s net national income of roughly € 180 billion euros.But such help only entrenches the wrong prices – and thus the economy ’ s lack of competitiveness .
The debts will re-emerge like a tumor , growing year by year , while undermining the creditworthiness of stable eurozone countries .
If that happened , the euro would eventually collapse .
Only a price reduction would create current-account surpluses and enable the crisis countries to pay off their foreign debts .
It is time for Europe to come to terms with this remorseless truth .
Those crisis countries that do not want to take it upon themselves to lower their prices should be given the opportunity to leave the eurozone temporarily in order to devalue prices and debts .
In other words , they should take a kind of euro sabbatical – a proposal that has now also been taken up by American economist Kenneth Rogoff .
After the ensuing financial thunderstorm died down , the sun would come out again very quickly .
The creditor countries would have to shoulder big losses from write-downs , but they would still end up with more than they would have gotten had the crisis countries remained within the eurozone , because these countries ’ new prosperity , gained by leaving , offers the only chance of recovering any assets at all .
A Failed Global Recovery
NEW HAVEN – The global economy is in the midst of its second growth scare in less than two years .
Get used to it .
In a post-crisis world , these are the footprints of a failed recovery .
The reason is simple .
The typical business cycle has a natural cushioning mechanism that wards off unexpected blows .
The deeper the downturn , the more powerful the snapback , and the greater the cumulative forces of self-sustaining revival .
Vigorous V-shaped rebounds have a built-in resilience that allows them to shrug off shocks relatively easily .
But a post-crisis recovery is a very different animal .
As Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff have shown in their book This Time is Different , over the long sweep of history , post-crisis recoveries in output and employment tend to be decidedly subpar .
Such weak recoveries , by definition , lack the cushion of V-shaped rebounds .
Consequently , external shocks quickly expose their vulnerability .
If the shocks are sharp enough – and if they hit a weakened global economy that is approaching its “ stall speed ” of around 3 % annual growth – the relapse could turn into the dreaded double-dip recession .
That is the risk today .
There can be no mistaking the decidedly subpar character of the current global recovery .
Superficially , the numbers look strong : world GDP rebounded by 5.1 % in 2010 , and is expected to rise another 4.3 % in 2011 , according to the International Monetary Fund .
But because these gains follow the massive contraction that occurred during the Great Recession of 2008-2009 , they are a far cry from the trajectory of a classic V-shaped recovery .
Indeed , if the IMF ’ s latest forecast proves correct , global GDP at the end of 2012 will still be about 2.2 percentage points below the level that would have been reached had the world remained on its longer-term 3.7 % annual-growth path .
Even if the global economy holds at a 4.3 % cruise speed – a big “ if , ” in my view – it will remain below its trend-line potential for over eight years in a row , through 2015 .
This protracted “ global output gap ” underscores the absence of a cushion in today ’ s world economy , as well as its heightened sensitivity to shocks .
And there have certainly been numerous such blows in recent months – from Europe ’ s sovereign-debt crisis and Japan ’ s natural disasters to sharply higher oil prices and another setback in the US housing recovery .
While none of these shocks appears to have been severe enough to have derailed the current global recovery , the combined effect is worrisome , especially in a still-weakened post-crisis world .
Most pundits dismiss the possibility of a double-dip recession .
Labeling the current slowdown a temporary “ soft patch , ” they pin their optimism on the inevitable rebound that follows any shock .
For example , a boost is expected from Japan ’ s reconstruction and supply-chain resumption .
Another assist may come from America ’ s recent move to tap its strategic petroleum reserves in an effort to push oil prices lower .
But in the aftermath of the worst crisis and recession of modern times – when shocks can push an already weakened global economy to its tipping point a lot faster than would be the case under a stronger growth scenario – the escape velocity of self-sustaining recovery is much harder to achieve .
The soft patch may be closer to a quagmire .
This conclusion should not be lost on high-flying emerging-market economies , especially in Asia – currently the world ’ s fastest-growing region and the leader of what many now call a two-speed world .
Yet with exports still close to a record 45 % of pan-regional GDP , Asia can hardly afford to take external shocks lightly – especially if they hit an already weakened baseline growth trajectory in the post-crisis developed world .
The recent slowdown in Chinese industrial activity underscores this very risk .
Policymakers are ill prepared to cope with a steady stream of growth scares .
They continue to favor strategies that are better suited to combating crisis than to promoting post-crisis healing .
That is certainly true of the United States .
While the US Federal Reserve Board ’ s first round of quantitative easing was effective in ending a wrenching crisis , the second round has done little to sustain meaningful recovery in the labor market and the real economy .
America ’ s zombie consumers need to repair their damaged balance sheets , and US workers need to align new skills with new jobs .
Open-ended liquidity injections accomplish neither .
European authorities are caught up in a similar mindset .
Mistaking a solvency problem for a liquidity shortfall , Europe has become hooked on the drip feed of bailouts .
However , this works only if countries like Greece grow their way out of a debt trap or abrogate their deeply entrenched social contracts .
The odds on either are exceedingly poor .
The likelihood of recurring growth scares for the next several years implies little hope for new and creative approaches to post-crisis monetary and fiscal policies .
Driven by short-term electoral horizons , policymakers repeatedly seek a quick fix – another bailout or one more liquidity injection .
Yet , in the aftermath of a balance-sheet recession in the US , and in the midst of a debt trap in Europe , that approach is doomed to failure .
Liquidity injections and bailouts serve only one purpose – to buy time .
Yet time is not the answer for economies desperately in need of the structural repairs of fiscal consolidation , private-sector deleveraging , labor-market reforms , or improved competitiveness .
Nor does time cushion anemic post-crisis recoveries from the inevitable next shock .
It ’ s hard to know when the next shock will hit , or what form it will take ; otherwise , it wouldn ’ t be a shock .
But , as night follows day , such a disruption is inevitable .
With policymakers reluctant to focus on the imperatives of structural healing , the result will be yet another growth scare – or worse .
A failed recovery underscores the risks of an increasingly treacherous endgame in today ’ s post-crisis world .
A Fair Deal for Africa ’ s Resources
WINDHOEK – Namibia is a resource-based economy that has embarked on an ambitious development program .
Our vision is to turn Namibia into a knowledge-based , diversified economy by 2030 .
One of the major principles upon which this vision is based is the idea of “ partnerships ” – a major prerequisite for the achievement of dynamic , efficient , and sustainable development .
Partnerships between governments and foreign investors are at the core of the sound management of natural resources .
But such partnerships can ’ t be taken for granted on a continent where the quest for natural resources has fueled decades of violent conflict .
Genuine partnership is difficult to achieve when resource-rich countries view foreign mining and drilling companies only as adversaries , seeking unfair and inequitable contracting agreements .
From the perspective of companies , partnership is unattractive when they are forced to incur large losses owing to project disruptions and contract renegotiations .
By contrast , partnerships are strengthened if companies and governments recognize their shared interest in durable , mutually beneficial contracts that ensure stable revenue streams from projects .
This requires a framework that takes into account , among other things , developmental possibilities , environmental concerns , labor conditions , and community interests , and that is adaptable to changing circumstances .
For governments , contracts are more likely to be durable if they are negotiated in a way that enables countries to receive fair and predictable long-term revenues .
For developing countries , this source of income can be substantial over several decades , and is needed by governments for investment in infrastructure , health care , education , etc .
On the other hand , poorly conceived and negotiated contracts not only prevent countries from enjoying the full long-term benefits of their natural resources , but also help to entrench poverty , corruption , and even conflict , particularly when governance systems are inadequate .
For companies , contracts are more likely to be durable if they are negotiated in a way that continuously rewards firms for risky and capital-intensive investment in terms of the net present value of their earnings .
Companies also want , of course , contracts that won ’ t be repudiated by the next government .
Indeed , poorly negotiated contracts are a recipe for adverse business outcomes , such as reduced security of mining titles , increased likelihood of operational disruptions from targeted civil protests , and greater risk of revisions to tax and other conditions .
Many governments in Africa simply don ’ t have the capacity to negotiate complex contracts that require a wide range of in-depth knowledge of law , finance , geology , economic modeling , etc . , while firms typically do .
As a result , the contracts that are negotiated often do not meet the criteria described above – to the disadvantage not only of governments , but also of firms interested in durable contracts .
In the absence of conditions for equitable negotiations , governments often deem the resulting contracts unfair – thus dooming them to be breached at some point .
In these circumstances , there is an urgent need for a facility that allows governments of poor countries to negotiate on a par with foreign investors to reach contracts that are as fair as possible under the given circumstances .
The outcome of such negotiations can be expected to be – and to be perceived to be – more balanced , more transparent , more stable , and therefore more sustainable .
The time has come to establish such a facility – in the interest of a mutually beneficial partnership between governments and foreign investors .
A Fair Deal for Turkey
Turkey has been given what looks like an ultimatum from the EU Commission : open your ports for ships from Cyprus within a month , or you may risk a halt to the EU accession talks now underway .
At the same time , the Commission ’ s latest report on Turkey ’ s progress toward accession notes that political reforms have slowed down , further calling into question the country ’ s future EU membership .
The Commission ’ s progress report will be dealt with by the European Council next month .
At that meeting , European leaders should ask themselves the following questions : Has the EU given Turkey a fair deal in the case of Cyprus ?
Has the EU ’ s behavior been consistent in supporting political reform in Turkey ?
What are the EU ’ s long-term interests vis-à-vis Turkey ?
If the answers to the first two questions are “ no ” – as I believe they are – the third question becomes vitally important .
True , Turkey has closed its ports to ships from ( Greek ) Cyprus , and this is a violation of agreements .
But it is also true that the northern Turkish part of Cyprus is denied access to free trade and other benefits from EU-membership .
This is because Cyprus remains a divided island .
It was assumed that Cyprus should be united when the country joined the EU in 2004 .
A United Nations plan for unification was accepted by the Turkish part .
But the Greek Cypriots voted against the plan because their leaders did not live up to the implicit deal with the EU to support it .
Nevertheless , Cyprus became an EU member – but only the Greek part .
This was clearly a mistake , because it made the EU part of the conflict .
It gave Greek Cypriot leaders the possibility of blocking progress in negotiations between the EU and Turkey .
So how can Turkey under these conditions maintain confidence in the EU ’ s fairness ?
Political and legal reforms in Turkey in recent years have been remarkably far-reaching , for they have clearly been spurred by Turks ’ wish to move closer to the EU .
But Turkish public support for EU membership has fallen dramatically as Turks have grown to feel that they are not being given a fair deal .
This has given new strength to those who want Turkey to develop in another direction , towards a more Islamic society instead of a modern secular state .
Therefore , the recent lack of progress in Turkey ’ s reform process can to a large extent be explained by the EU ’ s behavior .
This leaves us with the third question : what kind of Turkey does the EU want ?
There should be no doubt about the answer : it is clearly in the EU ’ s interest to see Turkey ’ s democracy and economy continue to strengthen .
More than 40 years ago , it was promised that once Turkey lives up to the preconditions for membership , it will be welcome in the EU .
It is high time that European leaders take this promise seriously .
It is a sad fact that a large majority of voters in the EU are against Turkish membership .
But they are reacting to the current situation .
When they are asked if they would like a reformed Turkey as a partner – a Turkey that lives up fully to the conditions for membership described in the Copenhagen Criteria ( democracy , rule of law , respect for human rights , and an effective market economy ) – many more are inclined to say yes .
European leaders must therefore take up two challenges .
First , they should say clearly to their own voters that the EU must live up to its promises to Turkey , and that this is in the larger interest of all Europeans .
Second , they should give Turkey a fair deal in the negotiations .
The first litmus test on European leadership concerns the practical problem of access to harbors .
Here the Finns , who chair the EU right now , have taken an initiative to implement a pragmatic solution that takes into consideration both sides in the conflict .
The Finnish initiative should be given strong support from all European leaders .
At the same time , a new effort should be made to bring life to the UN ’ s proposals regarding Cyprus .
If this means putting pressure on some actors within the EU ’ s own ranks , so be it .
A Fair Deal on Climate Change
The agreement on climate change reached at Heiligendamm by the G8 leaders merely sets the stage for the real debate to come : how will we divide up the diminishing capacity of the atmosphere to absorb our greenhouse gases ?
The G8 leaders agreed to seek “ substantial ” cuts in greenhouse gas emissions and to give “ serious consideration ” to the goal of halving such emissions by 2050 – an outcome hailed as a triumph by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and British Prime Minister Tony Blair .
Yet the agreement commits no one to any specific targets , least of all the United States , whose president , George W. Bush , will no longer be in office in 2009 , when the tough decisions have to be made .
One could reasonably ask why anyone thinks such a vague agreement is any kind of advance at all .
At the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 , 189 countries , including the US , China , India , and all the European nations , signed the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change , thereby agreeing to stabilize greenhouse gases “ at a low enough level to prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system . ”
Fifteen years later , no country has done that .
US per capita greenhouse gas emissions , already the highest of any major nation when Bush took office , have continued to rise .
In March , a leaked Bush administration report showed that US emissions were expected to rise almost as fast over the next decade as they did during the previous decade .
Now we have yet another agreement to do what these same nations said they would do 15 years ago .
That ’ s a triumph ?
If Bush or his successor wants to ensure that the next round of talks fails , that will be easy enough .
In justifying his refusal to sign the Kyoto Protocol , Bush has always referred to the fact that it did not commit China and India to mandatory emission limits .
Now , in response to suggestions by Bush and other G8 leaders that the larger developing nations must be part of the solution to climate change , Ma Kai , the head of China ’ s National Development and Reform Commission , has said that China will not commit to any quantified emissions reduction targets .
Likewise , the spokesman of India ’ s foreign minister , Navtej Sarna , has said that his country would reject such mandatory restrictions .
Are China and India being unreasonable ?
Their leaders have consistently pointed out that our current problems are the result of the gases emitted by the industrialized nations over the past century .
That is true : most of those gases are still in the atmosphere , and without them the problem would not be nearly as urgent as it now is .
China and India claim the right to proceed with industrialization and development as the developed nations did , unhampered by limits on their greenhouse gas emissions .
China , India , and other developing nations , have a point – or rather , three points .
First , if we apply the principle “ You broke it , you fix it , ” then the developed nations have to take responsibility for our “ broken ” atmosphere , which can no longer absorb more greenhouse gases without the world ’ s climate changing .
Second , even if we wipe the slate clean and forget about who caused the problem , it remains true that the typical US resident is responsible for about six times more greenhouse gas emissions than the typical Chinese , and as much as 18 times more than the average Indian .
Third , the richer nations are better able than less well-off nations to absorb the costs of fixing the problem without causing serious harm to their populations .
But it is also true that if China and India continue to increase their output of greenhouse gases , they will eventually undo all the good that would be achieved by deep emissions cuts in the industrialized nations .
This year or next , China will overtake the US as the world ’ s biggest greenhouse gas emitter – on a national , rather than a per capita basis , of course .
In 25 years , according to Fatih Birol , chief economist at the International Energy Agency , China ’ s emissions could be double those of the US , Europe , and Japan combined .
But there is a solution that is both fair and practical :
The fairness of giving every person on earth an equal share of the atmosphere ’ s capacity to absorb our greenhouse gas emissions is difficult to deny .
Why should anyone have a greater entitlement than others to use the earth ’ s atmosphere ?
But , in addition to being fair , this scheme also has practical benefits .
It would give developing nations a strong incentive to accept mandatory quotas , because if they can keep their per capita emissions low , they will have excess emissions rights to sell to the industrialized nations .
The rich countries will benefit , too , because they will be able to choose their preferred mix of reducing emissions and buying up emissions rights from developing nations .
A Farewell to ( Glorious ) War
In recent days , Italy ’ s government fell after losing a parliamentary vote on the country ’ s troop deployment in Afghanistan , while Britain and Denmark announced that they are to begin withdrawing their troops from Iraq .
Whereas the Bush administration is deploying an additional 21,000 American soldiers in Iraq , and is pushing for more allied troops in Afghanistan , America ’ s allies are rejecting its Middle East policy .
They are increasingly convinced that “ victory ” will be elusive in any asymmetric conflict between states , however powerful , and religiously driven armed insurgents .
Donald Rumsfeld ’ s dogma of military “ transformation ” – the technological upgrading of an army ’ s capacity to enable decisive victory with fewer troops – failed resoundingly in Iraq .
Nor could Israel , with its overwhelming technological advantage , defeat Hezbollah in Lebanon .
More rockets and missiles fell on northern Israel in 33 days than hit Britain during all of World War II .
So the Israelis now must reckon with an entirely new phenomenon : an asymmetric entity , Hezbollah , with nation-state firepower .
So the fierce debate over whether to increase the size of American ground forces in Iraq is beside the point .
Neither the Soviet experience in Afghanistan in the 1980 ’ s nor NATO ’ s today vindicates the claim that troop numbers are what matter most on the modern battlefield .
When geo-strategic military front lines are non-existent , as in Kosovo , Afghanistan , and Iraq , mass no longer equals victory .
The great military thinker Carl von Clausewitz ’ s notion of “ decisive battles ” as the “ center of gravity ” of war is simply irrelevant to conflicts that have no visible “ center of gravity . ”
Indeed , while wars from the time of Hannibal ’ s defeat of the Romans in 216 B.C. to the Gulf War of 1991 had this center of gravity , with a massive concentration of force capable of bringing an enemy to its knees , such industrial inter-state wars have now become an historical anachronism .
Most states nowadays lie within borders that are widely accepted as legitimate , and they increasingly abide by international norms of behavior in times of war .
In fact , the obligation of states to abide by humanitarian rules of conduct while their enemies are free to barbarize warfare is what makes asymmetric wars especially insoluble .
Moreover , in an era of global media and international war crimes courts , the criteria for states ’ use of military force have become more complex than ever .
Inter-state combat may still occur where strategic front lines can be found , such as Israel ’ s border with Syria , India ’ s border with Pakistan , and the border dividing the two Koreas .
In such cases , war , as the Egyptians showed in 1973 , might still serve as an avenue to resolving a conflict .
The Syrians might be tempted to launch an offensive against Israel with the objective of breaking the deadlock over the future of the Golan Heights .
However , in the case of Kashmir , the asymmetric conflict currently fought by proxies and terrorist groups might not degenerate into all-out war precisely because India and Pakistan have mutual nuclear deterrence.Indeed , such asymmetric conflicts through proxies have become the new conventional way that states avoid the price of a general war .
This changing nature of the battlefield essentially means that war as a conclusive event in an international conflict has become obsolete .
The facile Clausewitzian wisdom that military action ultimately leads to a political solution is no longer convincing .
“ Victory ” cannot bring peace , simply because there will always be a war after the war .
Thus , for example , the conventional war in Kosovo lasted for two months , only to usher in a six-year asymmetric conflict .
Likewise , America ’ s three-week “ shock and awe ” campaign in Iraq in 2003 ended in “ victory , ” but opened the gates of hell for occupiers and ordinary Iraqis alike .
And six months after the merciless pounding of southern Lebanon , Hezbollah is as strong as it was before .
Nor does the return of the Taliban in Afghanistan six years after their overthrow now seen too far-fetched .
It is during the war after the war that the occupier ’ s inferiority is revealed , with constant reinforcements increasing the number of targets for the insurgents far more quickly than the occupier can adapt to the changing battlefield .
The insurgents in Iraq , as the British admit , were able in just three years to cope with their enemies ’ technological superiority in a way that the IRA in Northern Ireland was unable to do in 30 years .
The Iraq war and Israel ’ s wars with Hamas and Hezbollah show the limits of what military power can achieve , as well as vindicate diplomacy and conflict resolution .
When it comes to tackling complex political and cultural conflicts , forging international and regional alliances around a legitimate objective is more important than sheer military capacity .
That said , it would be dangerously naïve to believe that the exercise of power and the capacity to intimidate are unnecessary .
But the objectives of the use of force need to be linked to the recognition that in today ’ s asymmetric conflicts , victory is no longer achieved on the battlefield .
Only better-informed foreign policies that can address the genuine anxieties of civilizations in crisis will yield more sustainable results .
A Farewell to Nuclear Arms
MOSCOW – Twenty-five years ago this month , I sat across from Ronald Reagan in Reykjavik , Iceland to negotiate a deal that would have reduced , and could have ultimately eliminated by 2000 , the fearsome arsenals of nuclear weapons held by the United States and the Soviet Union .
For all our differences , Reagan and I shared the strong conviction that civilized countries should not make such barbaric weapons the linchpin of their security .
Even though we failed to achieve our highest aspirations in Reykjavik , the summit was nonetheless , in the words of my former counterpart , “ a major turning point in the quest for a safer and secure world . ”
The next few years may well determine if our shared dream of ridding the world of nuclear weapons will ever be realized .
Critics present nuclear disarmament as unrealistic at best , and a risky utopian dream at worst .
They point to the Cold War ’ s “ long peace ” as proof that nuclear deterrence is the only means of staving off a major war .
As someone who has commanded these weapons , I strongly disagree .
Nuclear deterrence has always been a hard and brittle guarantor of peace .
By failing to propose a compelling plan for nuclear disarmament , the US , Russia , and the remaining nuclear powers are promoting through inaction a future in which nuclear weapons will inevitably be used .
That catastrophe must be forestalled .
As I , along with George P. Shultz , William J. Perry , Henry A. Kissinger , Sam Nunn , and others , pointed out five years ago , nuclear deterrence becomes less reliable and more risky as the number of nuclear-armed states increases .
Barring preemptive war ( which has proven counterproductive ) or effective sanctions ( which have thus far proven insufficient ) , only sincere steps toward nuclear disarmament can furnish the mutual security needed to forge tough compromises on arms control and nonproliferation matters .
The trust and understanding built at Reykjavik paved the way for two historic treaties .
The 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces ( INF ) Treaty destroyed the feared quick-strike missiles then threatening Europe ’ s peace .
And , in 1991 , the first Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty ( START I ) cut the bloated US and Soviet nuclear arsenals by 80 % over a decade .
But prospects for progress on arms control and nonproliferation are darkening in the absence of a credible push for nuclear disarmament .
I learned during those two long days in Reykjavik that disarmament talks could be as constructive as they are arduous .
By linking an array of interrelated matters , Reagan and I built the trust and understanding needed to moderate a nuclear-arms race of which we had lost control .
In retrospect , the Cold War ’ s end heralded the coming of a messier arrangement of global power and persuasion .
The nuclear powers should adhere to the requirements of the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty and resume “ good faith ” negotiations for disarmament .
This would augment the diplomatic and moral capital available to diplomats as they strive to restrain nuclear proliferation in a world where more countries than ever have the wherewithal to construct a nuclear bomb .
Only a serious program of universal nuclear disarmament can provide the reassurance and the credibility needed to build a global consensus that nuclear deterrence is a dead doctrine .
We can no longer afford , politically or financially , the discriminatory nature of the current system of nuclear “ haves ” and “ have-nots . ”
Reykjavik proved that boldness is rewarded .
Conditions were far from favorable for a disarmament deal in 1986 .
Before I became Soviet leader in 1985 , relations between the Cold War superpowers had hit rock bottom .
Reagan and I were nonetheless able to create a reservoir of constructive spirit through constant outreach and face-to-face interaction .
What seem to be lacking today are leaders with the boldness and vision to build the trust needed to reintroduce nuclear disarmament as the centerpiece of a peaceful global order .
Economic constraints and the Chernobyl disaster helped spur us to action .
Why has the Great Recession and the disastrous meltdown at Fukushima Daiichi in Japan not elicited a similar response today ?
A first step would be for the US finally to ratify the 1996 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ( CTBT ) .
President Barack Obama has endorsed this treaty as a vital instrument to discourage proliferation and avert nuclear war .
It ’ s time for Obama to make good on commitments he made in Prague in 2009 , take up Reagan ’ s mantle as Great Communicator , and persuade the US Senate to formalize America ’ s adherence to the CTBT .
This would compel the remaining holdouts – China , Egypt , India , Indonesia , Iran , Israel , North Korea , and Pakistan – to reconsider the CTBT as well .
That would bring us closer to a global ban on nuclear tests in any environment – the atmosphere , undersea , in outer space , or underground .
A second necessary step is for the US and Russia to follow up on the New START agreement and begin deeper weapons cuts , especially tactical and reserve weapons , which serve no purpose , waste funds , and threaten security .
This step must be related to limits on missile defense , one of the key issues that undermined the Reykjavik summit .
A fissile material cut-off treaty ( FMCT ) , long stalled in multilateral talks in Geneva , and a successful second Nuclear Security Summit next year in Seoul , will help secure dangerous nuclear materials .
This will also require that the 2002 Global Partnership , dedicated to securing and eliminating all weapons of mass destruction – nuclear , chemical , and biological – is renewed and expanded when it convenes next year in the US .
Our world remains too militarized .
In today ’ s economic climate , nuclear weapons have become loathsome money pits .
If , as seems likely , economic troubles continue , the US , Russia , and other nuclear powers should seize the moment to launch multilateral arms reductions through new or existing channels such as the UN Conference on Disarmament .
These deliberations would yield greater security for less money .
But the buildup of conventional military forces – driven in large part by the enormous military might deployed globally by the US – must be addressed as well .
As we engage in furthering our Conventional Forces in Europe ( CFE ) agreement , we should seriously consider reducing the burden of military budgets and forces globally .
US President John F. Kennedy once warned that “ every man , woman , and child lives under a nuclear sword of Damocles , hanging by the slenderest of threads , capable of being cut at any moment . ”
For more than 50 years , humanity has warily eyed that lethal pendulum while statesmen debated how to mend its fraying cords .
The example of Reykjavik should remind us that palliative measures are not enough .
Our efforts 25 years ago can be vindicated only when the Bomb ends up beside the slave trader ’ s manacles and the Great War ’ s mustard gas in the museum of bygone savagery .
Affirmative Action for Europe
The violence in France , fueled by staggering unemployment and ruthless policing , reflects the utter failure of the French model of social integration .
But violence elsewhere in Europe , such as the London bombings of July and the brutal murder of Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh on the streets of Amsterdam in November 2004 , had already made Europe ’ s failure to integrate its minorities painfully clear .
As the riots in France fade , French politicians are agonizing about how to proceed .
Forty years ago , after legal segregation of blacks and whites formally ended in America , the United States was confronted by similar problems .
America ’ s response shows , however , that integration cannot be viewed as a one-way street .
In addition to imposing demands and constraints on minorities to join the mainstream , society must be willing to demand of itself that it make room for all its citizens .
As a potential model to be followed , Europe should look at the so-called “ affirmative action ” policies that America enacted to provide opportunities to blacks .
Affirmative action , or “ positive discrimination , ” as some have called these policies , began with university admissions .
But , in the early 1970 ’ s , President Richard M. Nixon expanded the scope of affirmative action .
As a result , ethnicity began to be weighed as a positive factor not only in university admissions , but also in public procurement decisions , credit facilities for small enterprises , and government hiring .
The rational for affirmative action in those early years was the fact that , after a long history of systemic injustice , merely outlawing discrimination based on race or gender would not ensure equal opportunity for all .
Such programs are often viewed as contradicting a basic American value , namely that admissions , lending , and hiring decisions should be based on the merits of the individual , not group distinctions .
But they remain in existence three decades later .
Indeed , leading American companies , like General Motors , General Electric , and Walmart , have created affirmative action programs for hiring and selecting suppliers at their own initiative .
Similarly , anchormen and anchorwomen from all ethnic backgrounds populate American television news programs .
In France , by contrast , the appointment of the black anchorwoman Audrey Pulvar was big news on its own , because most of her colleagues in France are white .
Affirmative action in the US has been effective in creating a large African-American middle class .
The percentage of black households earning over $ 50,000 a year ( adjusted for inflation ) has more than tripled over the last four decades , from 9.1 % in 1967 to 27.8 % in 2001 .
Indeed , in the US , more people of color and women hold top jobs in the public and private sector than anywhere else in the world .
The fact that a large black underclass remains – something the recent floods in New Orleans revealed in a horrifically dramatic way – is mainly the result of failing school systems .
Affirmative action programs , of course , have always been vulnerable to attack by those who can ’ t benefit from them .
In 2003 , a white student asked the US Supreme Court to declare that the use of race in the University of Michigan ’ s admission policies violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution .
The Supreme Court , however , ruled that the program was constitutional , citing a “ compelling state interest ” in racial diversity .
“ Effective participation by members of all racial and ethnic groups in the civil life of our nation , ” the court said , “ is essential if the dream of one nation , indivisible , is to be realized . ”
In reaching its decision , the Supreme Court took into account a legal brief submitted by 60 major American businesses , led by General Motors , asking that affirmative action be upheld .
They argued that the skills needed in today ’ s global marketplace can only be developed through exposure to a wide diversity of people .
Retired military officers and commanders told the court that affirmative action was essential to maintaining an integrated officer corps .
What America ’ s affirmative action programs may not do is set quotas for minorities , as this prevents competition between different groups .
But , in comparing groups , it is permitted to use an individual ’ s status as member of an under-represented minority in his or her favor .
As a result , a university may select a black student with a satisfactory score on the admissions test , even if there is a white student with a better score .
From the current French viewpoint , however , laws and regulations based on ethnicity are regarded as an unwelcome encroachment on the Republican ideal .
French President Jacques Chirac vehemently opposes quotas for immigrants , out of fear that such a policy would stigmatize groups .
And French businesses don ’ t see it as their role to solve the problems of the suburbs .
Moreover , French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy hasn ’ t done much except hand out some special grants to the smartest immigrants from the suburbs .
France does have affirmative action programs , but they address poverty , not ethnicity .
If European politicians are serious about preventing a schism between population groups , affirmative action is essential – not only at the workplace , but also for small business loans , home loans , public procurement , and school admissions .
Tony Blair , who in July was faced with the shortcomings of integration in the UK , should take advantage of the country ’ s current presidency of the European Union to make affirmative action programs the top priority at next month ’ s summit of European government leaders in Brussels .
The Fascism of the Affluent
BERLIN – There is an alarming political shift to the right occurring on both sides of the Atlantic , linked to the growing force of openly chauvinist political parties and figures : Donald Trump in the United States , Marine Le Pen in France .
Other names could be added to the list : Hungary ’ s prime minister , Victor Orbán , who advocates “ illiberal democracy , ” or Jarosław Kaczyński and his quasi-authoritarian Law and Justice party , which now rules Poland .
Nationalistic , xenophobic political parties had been on the rise in many European Union member states long before Syrian refugees first arrived in appreciable numbers .
There has been Geert Wilders in the Netherlands , the Vlaams Blok ( succeeded by today ’ s Vlaams Belang ) in Belgium , the Freedom Party of Austria , the Sweden Democrats , the Finns Party , and the Danish People ’ s Party , to name just a few .
The reasons for such parties ’ rise and success vary greatly at the national level .
But their basic positions are similar .
All of them are raging against the “ system , ” the “ political establishment , ” and the EU .
Worse , they are not just xenophobic ( and , in particular , Islamophobic ) ; they also more or less unashamedly embrace an ethnic definition of the nation .
The political community is not a product of its citizens ’ commitment to a common constitutional and legal order ; instead , as in the 1930s , membership in the nation is derived from common descent and religion .
Like any extreme nationalism , the current one relies heavily on identity politics – the realm of fundamentalism , not reasoned debate .
As a result , its discourse takes an obsessive turn – usually sooner rather than later – in the direction of ethno-nationalism , racism , and religious war .
The rise of extreme nationalism and fascism in the 1930s is usually explained in terms of the outcome of World War I , which killed millions of people and filled the heads of millions more with militaristic notions .
The war also ruined Europe ’ s economy , leading to a global economic crisis and mass unemployment .
Destitution , poverty , and misery primed publics for toxic politics .
But conditions today in the West , in the US and Europe alike , are rather different , to say the least .
Given these countries ’ affluence , what accounts for their citizens ’ attraction to the politics of frustration ?
First and foremost , there is fear – and apparently a great deal of it .
It is a fear based on the instinctive realization that the “ White Man ’ s World ” – a lived reality assumed by its beneficiaries as a matter of course – is in terminal decline , both globally and in the societies of the West .
And migration is the issue that brings that prognosis home ( not just metaphorically ) to today ’ s angst-inspired nationalists .
Until recently , globalization was largely viewed as favoring the West .
But now – in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis and with the rise of China ( now turning into this century ’ s leading power before our eyes ) – it has become increasingly clear that globalization is a two-way street , with the West losing much of its power and wealth to the East .
Likewise , the world ’ s problems can no longer be suppressed and excluded , at least not in Europe , where they are now quite literally knocking on the door .
Meanwhile , at home , the White Man ’ s World is threatened by immigration , globalization of labor markets , gender parity , and the legal and social emancipation of sexual minorities .
In short , these societies are undergoing a fundamental shock to traditional roles and patterns of behavior .
From all these profound changes has arisen a yearning for simple solutions – to build fences and walls , for example , whether in the US South or in southern Hungary – and strong leaders .
It is no accident that Europe ’ s new nationalists view Russian President Vladimir Putin as a beacon of hope .
Of course , Putin has no appeal in the US ( the world ’ s greatest power won ’ t turn away from itself ) , or in Poland and the Baltic states ( where Russia is regarded as a threat to national independence ) .
Elsewhere in Europe , however , the new nationalists have made common cause with Putin ’ s anti-Western posturing and pursuit of Great Russia .
With the new nationalism threatening the European integration process , France holds the key .
Without France , Europe is neither conceivable nor practicable , and a President Le Pen would certainly sound the death knell for the EU ( as well as bringing disaster for her country and the continent as a whole ) .
Europe would then withdraw from twenty-first-century world politics .
This would lead inexorably to the end of the West in geopolitical terms : The US would have to reorient itself for good ( toward the Pacific ) , while Europe would become Eurasia ’ s appendix .
The end of the West is a dim prospect , to be sure , but we aren ’ t there yet .
What is clear is that more depends on the future of Europe than even the most vociferous advocates of European unification had previously believed .
Affordable Green Energy
COPENHAGEN – Public skepticism about global warming may be growing , but the scientific consensus is as solid as ever : man-made climate change is real , and we ignore it at our peril .
But if that issue is settled ( and it should be ) , there is an equally large and important question that remains wide open : what should we do about it ?
One prescription that is bandied about with increasing frequency certainly sounds sensible : the world should drastically cut the amount of greenhouse gases that it pumps into the atmosphere each day .
Specifically , we are told , the goal should be a 50 % reduction in global carbon-dioxide emissions by the middle of the century .
Even its backers concede that achieving this target won ’ t be easy – and they are right .
In fact , they are so right that they are wrong .
Allow me to explain .
Our dependency on carbon-emitting fuels is more than enormous .
It is overwhelming .
For all the talk about solar , wind , and other hyped green-energy sources , they make up only 0.6 % of global energy consumption .
Renewable energy overwhelmingly comes from often-unsustainable burning of wood and biomass by people in the Third World .
Fossil fuels account for more than four-fifths of the world ’ s energy diet .
So , in order to cut global carbon emissions in half by the middle of the century , we would obviously have to start getting a lot more of our energy from sources that don ’ t emit carbon .
Can we do this ?
According to the International Energy Agency , here ’ s what it would take to achieve the goal of cutting emissions by 50 % between now and mid-century :
Now consider this : this list does not describe what we would have to build between now and 2050 , but what we would have to build each and every year until then !
One more thing : even if we managed to do all this ( which we obviously cannot ) , the impact on global temperatures would be hardly noticeable by 2050 .
According to the best-known climate-economic model , this vast undertaking would likely wind up reducing global temperatures by just one-tenth of one degree centigrade ( one-fifth of one degree Fahrenheit ) , while holding back sea-level rises by only one centimeter ( less than half an inch ) .
That ’ s not a lot of bang for the buck .
Indeed , the projected costs of this approach – some $ 5 trillion annually by mid-century – are so much greater than its likely benefits that it makes no sense to call it a solution at all .
Fortunately , there is a better , smarter way to deal with global warming .
What if , instead of spending trillions of dollars trying to build an impossible number of power plants – or , more likely , condemning billions of people around the world to continued poverty by trying to make carbon-emitting fuels too expensive to use – we devoted ourselves to making green energy cheaper ?
Right now , solar panels are so expensive – about 10 times more than fossil fuels in terms of cost per unit of energy output – that only well-heeled , well-meaning ( and , usually , well-subsidized ) Westerners can afford to install them .
But think where we ’ d be if we could improve the efficiency of solar cells by a factor of ten – in other words , if we could make them cheaper than fossil fuels .
We wouldn ’ t have to force ( or subsidize ) anyone to stop burning coal and oil .
Everyone , including the Chinese and the Indians , would shift to the cheaper and cleaner alternatives – and global emission targets would automatically be met .
Can we achieve this technological miracle over the next 20 to 40 years ?
In a word , yes .
The price of solar energy has been dropping steadily for 30 years – by about 50 % every decade – and we could likely accelerate that decline further with sufficiently large investments in research and development .
How large ?
If we were willing to devote just 0.2 % of global GDP ( roughly $ 100 billion a year ) to green-energy R &amp; D , I believe that we could bring about game-changing breakthroughs not just for solar power , but also for a wide variety of other alternative-energy technologies .
This belief in the potential of technological progress strikes some climate activists as naïve or even delusional .
But is it really ?
Consider one of the miracles of the modern age – the personal computer .
These devices didn ’ t become household items because governments subsidized purchases or forced up the price of typewriters and slide rules .
No , what happened is that , largely as a result of the space race , the United States government poured lots of money into R &amp; D for solid-state physics and electronics engineering .
The resulting breakthroughs not only got Neil Armstrong to the moon in 1969 , but also made it possible for Apple to introduce the first Mac in 1976 and IBM to debut the first PC five years later .
We can do the same for clean energy .
Forget about subsidizing inefficient technologies or making fossil fuels too expensive to use .
Instead , let ’ s fund the basic research that will make green energy too cheap and easy to resist .
Yes to Affordable Housing in My Backyard
ZURICH – From London to Lagos , “ affordable housing ” has become an oxymoron .
In most cities , rents and home prices have increased faster than incomes , and in urban areas with robust job markets , housing stocks have failed to keep pace with demand .
Some 330 million urban households either live in substandard housing , or pay more for their housing than they can afford .
If current trends are not reversed , that number could grow to 440 million by 2025 .
Without affordable housing , people suffer and economies stagnate .
California ’ s housing shortage illustrates the problem .
From 2009 to 2014 , the state grew by 544,000 households but added only 467,000 homes .
Today , amid a total housing shortfall of two million units , half of the state ’ s residents cannot afford to buy homes in their local market .
City governments are aware of the problem , and many are attempting to intervene .
Unfortunately , many policies focus on demand and financing , rather than supply .
Subsidies , low-interest loans , and rent control may bring relief to households struggling with affordability , but these measures will not solve the housing shortage .
The only way to do that is to address two key challenges that have conspired to halt home building in many urban areas .
The first challenge is location ; finding affordable land is one of the biggest constraints on housing development virtually everywhere .
In cities like Rio de Janeiro , land costs can account for more than 40 % of a home ’ s price ; in extremely expensive markets , like San Francisco , it can be double that .
Mapping software and inventory reviews can help planning officials find cheaper solutions .
In some cases , land can be provided more cost-effectively through smart zoning .
Seoul , for example , allows residential buildings near transit stops to have a larger “ floor area ratio , ” a regulatory mechanism that encourages density .
Similar approaches could be used elsewhere .
City planners should also promote better use of existing density rules .
A 2016 analysis of Los Angeles ’ s housing stock by the McKinsey Global Institute found that 28 % of parcels zoned for multifamily development were underutilized .
Maximizing this development potential could add more than 300,000 units to the city ’ s housing inventory .
Additionally , authorities can do more to encourage the use of vacant plots .
Around the world , a surprising amount of urban land , including city-owned property , is undeveloped , and taxing idle or underused land could stimulate construction .
Cities might also consider changing residential zoning laws to encourage owners of single-family homes to add accessory units , such as garage apartments and backyard cottages .
Once a city has identified suitable areas for construction , the second challenge is containing the political fallout that often accompanies new development .
Proposals to increase housing density are frequently met by opposition from current residents , whose fears range from adverse impact on services to downward pressure on existing home values ( or upward pressure and gentrification ) .
To address these concerns , many cities hold public hearings or put projects to a vote .
Often , however , the voices of those who want to preserve the status quo are louder than those who fear being priced out .
As a result , very little affordable housing is built .
The urban planning process needs to take into account the concerns of all stakeholders – including newcomers , young adults , low-income service workers , renters , and homeowners .
Digital surveys and analytical tools can make the process more inclusive by reducing the influence of narrow but entrenched interest groups .
And , because housing availability affects companies ’ ability to attract talent , employers near proposed housing sites must also be engaged .
While critics ’ concerns should be taken seriously , governments must insulate their approval processes from manipulation .
In some cities , repeated lawsuits and requests for further study delay projects for years and add millions of dollars to development costs .
One way to address this issue would be to adhere to “ use by right ” regulations , whereby projects that follow city zoning and land-use codes receive minimal review .
Moreover , implementation of blanket environmental reviews could ease approvals for future developers .
Governments could also create appeals boards with the power to accelerate rulings on rejected projects .
City governments can win support for new housing by convincing constituents that population growth fuels economic growth .
The alternative – allowing serious housing shortages to go unaddressed – will make it impossible for future generations to put down roots .
By managing density carefully , authorities can overcome opposition and get their cities building again .
Afghanistan and the Future of NATO
Things aren ’ t going well in Afghanistan .
Sometime at the turn of 2001 / 2002 , the Bush administration concluded that the stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan was no longer its top priority and decided to bet instead on military-led regime change in Iraq .
Afghanistan can thus rightly be seen as the first victim of the administration ’ s misguided strategy .
But the Bush administration is not the sole culprit for the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan .
It was NATO ’ s job to ensure the country ’ s stability and security , and thus NATO ’ s weak General Secretary and the European allies , especially Germany and France , share the responsibility for the worsening situation .
Yet , despite all the difficulties , the situation in Afghanistan , unlike that in Iraq , is not hopeless .
There was a good reason for going to war in Afghanistan in the first place , because the attacks of September 11 , 2001 , originated there .
Once undertaken , the West ’ s intervention ended an almost uninterrupted civil war , and is still viewed with approval by a majority of the population .
Finally , unlike in Iraq , the intervention did not fundamentally rupture the inner structure of the Afghan state or threaten its very cohesion .
If the West pursues realistic aims , and does so with perseverance , its main objective – a stable central government that can drive back the Taliban , hold the country together and , with the help of the international community , ensure the country ’ s development – is still achievable .
There are four preconditions of the West ’ s success :
The war in Afghanistan was never just an Afghan civil war ; rather , for decades the country has been a stage of regional conflicts and hegemonic struggles .
So , while the rebirth of the Taliban is in part due to the woefully neglected reconstruction of the Pashto Southern and Eastern part of the country , it also has external causes .
Most notably , for more than two years now , Pakistan has been moving away from the Bonn consensus , betting on the rebirth of the Taliban and giving it massive support .
Indeed , without Taliban sanctuaries on the Pakistani side of the Afghan border , and without Pakistani financial backing , the rebirth of the Taliban ’ s armed insurgency against the central Afghan government would have been impossible .
Pakistan ’ s actions are explained mainly by its strategic readjustment in light of US weakness in Iraq and the region as a whole , and by the newly strengthened relationships between India and Afghanistan , resulting in an increased Indian presence in Central Asia .
In this connection , Pakistan views the Karzai government in Kabul as unfriendly to Islamabad and a threat to its key strategic interests .
Without Taliban sanctuaries on the Pakistani side of the Afghan border and the backing by the Pakistani intelligence service ISI , the rebirth of the Taliban ’ s armed insurgency against the central Afghan government would have been impossible .
But , by aiding the Taliban , Pakistan is playing with fire , because there are now also Pakistani Talibans who pose a threat to Pakistan .
US policy toward Pakistan is also dangerously shortsighted and reminiscent of the mistakes the US made in Iran prior to the 1979 Islamic revolution .
Nevertheless , the US at least has a Pakistan policy – which is more than can be said about NATO and Europe .
In fact , it is all but incomprehensible that while the future of NATO is being decided in the Hindu Kush mountains , and while thousands of European soldiers stationed there are risking their lives , Pakistan – the key to the success or failure of the mission in Afghanistan – is not given any role in NATO ’ s plans and calculations .
Part of NATO ’ s trouble stems from the fact that a number of member states insist on the right to make their own military and political decisions , and these “ national reservations ” severely limit NATO ’ s ability to act .
If NATO is to succeed , this must change without further delay .
A NATO summit , during which all members would take stock of the situation and draw the appropriate conclusions , is therefore long overdue .
The national reservations must be go , and a joint strategy for success must be adopted , including a massive increase in civilian and military aid for Afghanistan , if the country is to be prevented from descending into the same abyss as Iraq .
Moreover , a regional consensus among all the players must be rebuilt , including Pakistan , Iran , and India , whose joint responsibility for peace , stability , and redevelopment in Afghanistan must be recognized by Europe and the US .
To accomplish this , a follow-up conference to the Bonn Agreement is also required .
While the war in Iraq has been based on wishful thinking , the war in Afghanistan was necessary and unavoidable because it was there that the terrorist threat of September 11 , 2001 , originated .
It would be more than a tragedy – it would be unparalleled political folly – if , because of a lack of commitment and political foresight , the West were to squander its successes in Afghanistan .
Europe would have to pay an unacceptably high price , and NATO ’ s future would likely be jeopardized .
Afghanistan Is Lost Without Better Governance
NEW YORK – President Obama &apos;s recent trip to Afghanistan highlighted the growing American and international perception that without better governance Afghanistan will fail .
As President Obama apparently made clear in his late night meeting with President Hamid Karzai , no matter what other progress is made , America and its allies cannot succeed in Afghanistan unless the Afghan government succeeds — and that government is moving in the wrong direction .
Until this changes , all other efforts will ultimately be in vain and current levels of international engagement with Afghanistan will become unjustifiable .
The United States and its Afghan and NATO allies have demonstrated unmistakable progress in Afghanistan this year .
The ongoing Marja campaign , the arrest of Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar and two Taliban &quot; shadow governors &quot; in Pakistan , and the recent drone strike hitting top leaders of the Al Qaeda-affiliated Haqqani network are all clear steps in the right direction .
President Obama has defined America &apos;s goals in Afghanistan as denying Al Qaeda a safe haven , reversing the Taliban &apos;s momentum , and helping the country &apos;s security forces and government &quot; take lead responsibility for Afghanistan ’ s future . &quot;
To this end , Obama launched an 18-month military &quot; surge &quot; with the backing of other NATO member countries , to be followed by the beginning of withdrawal .
To achieve these goals in such a short time , NATO and its Afghan partners must overcome three enormous obstacles .
First , they must fight far more successfully against the Taliban to create space for rebuilding and possible negotiation .
Second , they must convince Pakistan to begin actively opposing the Afghan Taliban and denying them the safe haven and support they currently receive in Pakistan .
Third , they must support the emergence of a legitimate Afghan government that is not , unlike the current government , seen as corrupt and ineffectual by its citizens .
Because the NATO strategy &apos;s success requires significant progress on each of these fronts , even the current preliminary signs of military progress and in Pakistan &apos;s relations with the Afghan Taliban will be for naught if Afghanistan &apos;s government cannot establish its legitimacy domestically .
Recent efforts by President Hamid Karzai ’ s administration to limit its public accountability demonstrate that the Afghan government in its current form lacks either the capacity or the willingness to do so .
For at least a year prior to the August 2009 elections , NATO officials recognized that ordinary Afghans &apos; disgust with their government &apos;s massive corruption was among the Taliban &apos;s most effective recruitment tools .
At that time , these officials argued that the elections would give Afghanistan ’ s leaders a clear mandate for reform .
The deeply discredited elections put an end to those hopes .
The original flaw of the 2009 elections was structural .
There was no voter list , and so it was nearly impossible to prevent ballot-stuffing .
The body empowered to conduct the vote , the Independent Election Commission , was run by commissioners all appointed by and partial to one candidate , Karzai .
One institution , the Electoral Complaints Commission — a hybrid Afghan-international oversight body with a majority vote controlled by United Nations-appointed commissioners — retained its credibility throughout the process .
Only the presence of the ECC , particularly its international commissioners , and the hope that it would ensure at least some fairness into the process prevented the electoral controversy from erupting into open conflict .
As flawed as the elections were and as contentious as the outcome ultimately was , the situation would have been far worse without the ECC .
After the election , many hoped that Karzai would recognize the need to build a more accountable government to help secure both Afghanistan &apos;s future and the future of international military and financial support .
In a high-profile speech in London this past January , Karzai pledged to make progress in fighting corruption and promoting government accountability .
Instead , the opposite appears to be happening .
Since his London speech , Karzai has actively opposed efforts to attack official corruption , sought to appoint warlords to his cabinet , failed to promote civil society , and weakened processes aimed at increasing the representation of women in parliament .
To make matters worse , Karzai issued a decree on February 13 permitting him to appoint all of the ECC &apos;s members , a measure clearly designed to strengthen the patronage system and weaken opposition movements ’ prospects in future elections and a strong demonstration that his administration is not serious about establishing greater government accountability .
NATO and the international community must do everything possible to foster accountable government at all levels in Afghanistan .
Although Afghanistan &apos;s government does not need to be fully centralized , Afghanistan cannot succeed if the central government fails .
For this reason , unless the Karzai government changes course there is no justification for NATO member countries to risk the lives of their soldiers and commit other valuable resources to the struggle in Afghanistan if the Afghan government ’ s corruption and legitimacy deficit make current progress unsustainable and achievement of NATO ’ s goals impossible .
Karzai is free to lead his country as he pleases , but America and its allies cannot and should not maintain their current levels of commitment unless his government can establish itself as a viable partner .
The 18-month clock is ticking .
No Exit from Afghanistan
NEW DELHI – Despite frequent turmoil and repeated invasions , Afghanistan has remained virtually unchanged for centuries .
Nearly 120 years ago , Winston Churchill described the futility of warfare in the region : “ Financially it is ruinous .
Morally it is wicked .
Militarily it is an open question , and politically it is a blunder . ”
Churchill ’ s assessment undoubtedly rings true for many United States and NATO officials today , as they attempt to coordinate an exit from America ’ s longest overseas combat commitment in history .
While the war in Afghanistan may have resulted in fewer American deaths and injuries than previous US wars , the human cost remains substantial – especially after factoring in Afghan deaths and injuries .
Moreover , trillions of dollars have been wasted , with the few positive effects of the US-led military intervention already beginning to fade , and its many adverse consequences continuing to destabilize the region .
US President Barack Obama is now trying to negotiate a new “ status of forces ” agreement with the Afghan government in order to establish how many US troops will remain in Afghanistan and the terms of their deployment .
But the reality is that the US is scuttling from a conflict that it has lost , just as it did in Vietnam almost 40 years ago , leaving the beleaguered population to its own devices .
Rather than admit defeat , US officials are resorting to diversionary rhetoric .
For example , speaking recently in New Delhi , Secretary of State John Kerry said that the key to stabilizing Afghanistan is to build a “ new silk road ” connecting it with central Asia – a cynical contrivance apparently aimed at cloaking America ’ s failure in illusions of future commerce .
Kerry ’ s insistence that the US is not withdrawing , but “ drawing down , ” is a similarly transparent attempt at manipulation .
To be sure , America ’ s presence in Afghanistan has spawned important regional linkages ; unfortunately , they are not the kind that support economic renewal .
The last decade of war and lawlessness has facilitated the Taliban ’ s proliferation across Pakistan and Afghanistan , leading the Taliban to consider itself an indefatigable force – a belief that could lead its leaders to undercut any progress toward stability .
In fact , the Taliban ’ s confidence already drove them to disrupt plans for peace talks with the Afghan government .
After agreeing to establish an office in Qatar exclusively to host the talks , in June the Taliban opened a quasi-embassy of the “ Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan . ”
The Afghan government responded by suspending talks with the Taliban , as well as the status-of-forces negotiations with the US .
Pakistan recommends seeking an alternate venue for the negotiations with the Taliban , rather than abandoning reconciliation efforts altogether .
This bodes well for the resumption of talks , given that Pakistan played a leading role in facilitating the Taliban ’ s emergence and is now home to the Afghan Taliban ’ s ruling council , including its leader , Mullah Omar , along with the Pakistani Taliban .
India ’ s former ambassador to Afghanistan , Vivek Katju , is confident that Afghan President Hamid Karzai ’ s anger at the Taliban ’ s gambit in Qatar will not delay negotiations for long .
( Indeed , Karzai has reportedly already met with Taliban representatives for secret talks aimed at restarting the stalled peace initiative . )
Katju attributes the talks ’ inevitable resumption to America ’ s “ strategic desperation , ” which is so acute that the US would be unlikely even to follow through on Kerry ’ s pledge to call off the talks if any link to Al Qaeda were found .
After all , the US has already accepted the Taliban ’ s unrealistic assurances that it will not use Afghanistan as a base from which to “ foment trouble ” – that is , execute terrorist attacks – elsewhere .
Fortunately for the US , the Taliban is no longer a homogeneous group .
A decade of running and hiding from unrelenting surveillance and targeted drone attacks has caused the movement to splinter .
Yet , as the security expert Sajjan M. Gohel has observed , “ the displaced and disillusioned Taliban youth of today ” have “ found solace and purpose in an extremely radical interpretation of Islam . ”
The Taliban may no longer be a unified force , but they clearly remain a dangerous one .
All of these developments have put India in a difficult position .
In Afghanistan , America ’ s military was so tactically dependent on Pakistan that , on several occasions , the US encouraged India to curtail development projects , such as rebuilding Afghanistan ’ s infrastructure .
Following America ’ s military withdrawal , Afghanistan will most likely revert to pre-war conditions ; Pakistan will revive state-sponsored terrorism against India ; and extremism will spill into the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir .
In order to make the best of a grim situation , India must be prepared to protect its own interests at all costs .
After all , as the US extricates itself from its Afghan quagmire , its own national interests will continue to trump all other considerations .
But China , Pakistan , and Iran also have their own important national-security interests in Afghanistan that each will now do their utmost to guarantee .
So , while US troops may be leaving Afghanistan , an end to the violence spawned by America ’ s war remains nothing more than a distant dream – especially for Afghanistan ’ s South Asian neighbors .
Afghanistan ’ s Customary Anguish
FARAH , AFGHANISTAN – When the problems riddling Afghan society are listed – violence , insecurity , corruption , religious fundamentalism – one dominating factor is usually left out : the influence of customary law .
In Afghanistan , there are three principal legal references : constitutional law , the Koran , and the system of customary law known as Farhang , the most dominant and strictest version of which is called Pashtunwali ( the way of the Pashtuns ) .
Originally an ancient honor code , Farhang ensures the dominance of the oldest male of any household , followed by married sons , unmarried sons , and grandsons , then wives ( with the youngest at the bottom ) .
Collective decisions are taken by patriarchs in councils called jirgas , where all have to be in agreement .
This agreement includes including collaborating or not with the Taliban , cooperating with the Coalition forces , accepting or refusing poppy eradication in a village .
Everything else is left to patriarchal discretion . Here , no one will intervene except to reinforce the application of the patriarch &apos;s rights – say , in stoning a supposedly wayward girl , or turning a blind eye to so-called “ honor killings ” of women .
Every act of an Afghan male ’ s life is integrated in a form of reciprocity , in which nothing is free .
Melmastia , the basic tenet of hospitality means “ I will give you shelter if you ask me to , even if you are a fugitive murderer ; but , in exchange , you fight my battles . ”
This sense of customary obligation is why so many of President Hamid Karzai ’ s cronies remain in place and Taliban leaders remain safe .
Women are excluded from collective decision-making , as they are mere objects .
Girls are literally sold upon marriage ( the father is paid money for his daughter ’ s labor and reproductive capacity ) and join their husband ’ s household .
The younger the girl , the higher the price .
Marriage , especially in the provinces , is routinely consummated on pre-pubescent bodies .
Yet women are precious in their own way .
A family ’ s principal “ cultural capital ” is its honor , which is ensured by denying women any opportunity to highlight male failings and therefore tarnish clan respectability .
As a result , women must be strictly secluded and made invisible when in public , for they are personally responsible for the desire that they could ignite in schools , hospitals , parks , or markets .
The all-covering burqa ensures sufficient anonymity to permit women a certain amount of freedom in public space .
Every female simultaneously carries her father ’ s and her husband ’ s honor , and will stoically submit to all forms of violence committed in its name .
This may mean dying in childbirth rather than risking the “ dishonor ” of giving birth in a public place , a hospital , in front of strangers .
Going to court is practically unheard of , as it would mean renouncing family practices .
From the male point of view , resorting to outside police or judicial intervention would signify an inability to fight one ’ s own battles – an admission of defeat and a symbolic castration .
This helps explain the intense corruption present in Afghan courts , where “ honor ” can be redeemed by bribing a judge to have a rapist or murderer released .
As violence is strictly a private matter , relinquishing justice to state institutions could be an unacceptable humiliation .
Customary law is not rigid in that it is made to fit round the demands of global economy .
It has become more rigorous in it s applications due to the influence ofmilitant Islam , which seeks to use religious texts to legitimize escalating brutality , especially against women .
However , Farhang and privatized violence are precisely what Mohammad sought to ban through Koranic law , which went beyond the personal domain and instituted a code that gave some rights to women .
For example , while the Koran allows for a measure of female inheritance , tribal custom does not authorize it , which explains the popularity of tribal councils to resolve inheritance problems and cheat women out of their rights .
Similarly , whereas the Koran requires four eyewitnesses as proof of adultery , mere suspicion of some unregulated , potentially sexual conduct by a woman warrants stoning under customary law .
Yet an awareness of alternatives is seeping in through the media , even in remote provinces .
Iranian films and the much loved Indian TV serials , not to mention the occasional American film , influence peoples &apos; expectations .
Add to that the experience of having lived abroad as refugees in Pakistan and Iran .
Girls know that there are options to an unacceptable way of life : women are increasingly demanding more from life than what custom ordains .
This is especially true for those who have lived in Iran , a totally Muslim environment that allows women the freedom to study and work as well as access to adequate healthcare and family planning .
Once back in rural Afghanistan , forced into brutal marriages , many desperate women – especially returnees from Iran – resort to self-immolation .
Violence and murder of women are on the increase , perpetrated by men who feel that these alternatives pose a threat to their authority .
The West imagines that religion is the central issue in Afghanistan .
But the heart of the matter is the preservation of ancient patriarchal rights that go back to Biblical times , reformatted to fit the demands of globalized capitalism .
Governments and international aid organizations have failed to take into consideration the role of Farhang , perhaps because the power of unwritten law remains largely inconceivable in the West .
But Afghanistan cannot begin to solve its many problems until it criminalizes the privatized violence of this antiquated code .
Afghanistan ’ s Drug-Friendly Environment
Afghanistan ’ s President Hamid Karzai has stepped up international fundraising efforts in recent weeks , seeking a fresh package of military and reconstruction aid from the United States , together with stronger strategic guarantees .
But Karzai ’ s relationship with his sponsors has begun to sour , in part owing to charges that his government has failed to stop the resurgence of Afghanistan ’ s huge opium trade .
Underlying the opium trade issue is a security threat of another kind , one overlooked since the US-led invasion toppled the Taliban regime in 2001 , despite the grave risk it poses to Afghanistan ’ s long-term stability , and that of the region .
In countries like Afghanistan , where 80 % of the population lives on what they grow and many communities live far from any water source , environmental damage can be both economically devastating and politically momentous .
That lesson should have been absorbed and understood , not least by American strategists , long before the Taliban ’ s fall .
After all , desertification and deforestation helped fuel the rise , two decades earlier , of the Maoist guerilla group Sendero Luminoso ( Shining Path ) in Peru .
Sendero , which supplemented its income with drug production and timber smuggling , deliberately chose drought-weakened and deforested mountain villages as the stronghold of its insurgency .
Similarly , the Maoist insurgency in Nepal , which has claimed 10,000 lives , exploits the desperation of mountain villagers hit by flash floods – the result of deforestation higher up .
No Maoist group could ever gain a toehold in Afghanistan ’ s parched Pashtun south ( these were , after all , people who , bare-knuckled , smashed the Soviets ) .
But the Taliban ’ s rapid rise in the 1990 ’ s was inextricably linked to the failure of irrigation systems .
Villagers whose crops shriveled and whose livestock died in a prolonged drought saw joining the Taliban as an economic opportunity .
Had there been more irrigation , the Taliban ’ s gains might have been far less impressive .
The Taliban are now an increasingly spent force , but lack of water reinforced the logic of opium production across its former strongholds in the south .
Irrigation has failed or is inadequate in Helmand , Uruzgan , and Kandahar – three of the top five opium-producing provinces – where indebted farmers are hooked by the economics : opium brings in eight times as much cash as wheat and uses less water .
Without serious investment in irrigation , including construction of reservoirs to make use of the snowfall in the Hindu Kush , and in new cash crops such as saffron and rose oil , Afghanistan ’ s drift toward narco-statehood will continue , with all the instability that this implies .
Clear-cutting of old growth forests in the mountains bordering Pakistan may prove as problematic .
Agriculture there has been damaged by the cutting of walnut , apricot , and mulberry trees for winter fuel , and by a failure to replant poplar , willow , and tamarisk – the trees that hold fragile meadows in place .
These sorts of trees can be restored , given a concerted campaign and investment in nurseries to produce local varieties .
Loss of the ancient cedar , pine , fir , and oak forests on the slopes above is another matter .
This year ’ s snowmelt caused landslides and flooding – a warning of more soil erosion and destruction of arable land to come ; hundreds died and thousands lost their livelihoods .
Forestry has always been a problem in Afghanistan .
In 1960 , the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization spoke of wasteful logging practices , such as “ head-skidding ” ( in which a log is rolled downhill , ripping up plants and soil ) .
Aerial photographers were called in , and a large budget was set aside .
But , in 1976 , the FAO admitted in a new plan that forest and watershed management activities had “ turned out to be quite limited . ”
The 1976 plan called for sustainable logging and basic forest-fire control , but war intervened , costing Afghanistan half its forest cover .
Up to 60 % of the old growth forest in Nangahar , the second largest opium-producing province , may have been cut during the war years .
Mujahedin factions and later the Taliban exported stands of fine-grained cedar by the truckload from Nangahar and surrounding provinces to Pakistan , often in return for arms .
Illegal logging continues today , with only ineffectual efforts made to stop it .
At the current rate , Afghanistan ’ s old growth forest could vanish within a decade .
The UN acknowledges the problem but is ( rightly ) unwilling to risk sending forestry experts into a tribal region where American and allied troops venture only in armored convoys .
Safety concerns and cost also limit intervention by international conservation organizations .
A new initiative called the Green Corps includes 300 forest rangers charged with stopping illegal logging , and the ministry hopes to boost their numbers within a year .
But the initiative is unlikely to have much effect .
Illegal logging crews number 200 or more .
They have chain saws and trucks .
They are armed and work with the backing of drug and emerald smugglers – and often of local officials .
The price of plank cedar in Lahore is incentive enough to corrupt , or kill , any Green Corps men brave enough to stand in their way .
Environmental issues are of paramount importance in marginal countries because their impact on human survival is immediate and direct .
The inadequate response to pressing questions of natural resource management , whether of water or trees , merely strengthens the hands of opium dealers and malcontents in what is already the most disaffected and sensitive part of Afghanistan – the clear-cut mountain slopes where intelligence officers believe Osama bin Laden is most likely holed up .
Afghanistan ’ s Dying Mothers
Roughly 75 % of Afghan newborns that die do so because of lack of food , warmth , and care .
Unloved little girls fare the worst .
In Afghanistan as a whole , a woman dies of pregnancy-related causes every 27 minutes – and perhaps even more frequently , because many such deaths go unrecorded .
Many , perhaps most , are under sixteen years of age .
The Taliban – blamed nowadays for just about all of Afghanistan ’ s ills – have officially been gone for nearly seven years , so why are conditions still so abysmal ?
In Kabul and Herat , mobile phones abound , a tooth-eroding concoction called “ Afghan Cola ” is sold , the Internet works ( sometimes ) , there are ATM machines , sophisticated heroin laboratories , four-wheel drive vehicles , five-star hotels , ads for private banks – all the trappings of globalized modernity .
Yet so many women die like flies , in pools of blood and deep-rooted indifference .
While billions of dollars in aid have led to improvements in urban areas , where health facilities have been built and midwives trained , the overall maternal death figures have hardly changed .
As one doctor told me : “ A competent midwife or nurse would rather be out of work in Kabul than stuck in a remote village . ”
But most Afghans live in remote villages – those in Badakhshan can be reached only after a day ’ s bumpy ride on a donkey .
This miserable situation has been attributed to various causes , mainly lack of infrastructure and local economic conditions .
But cultural questions must also be addressed , because gender discrimination is the most important cause of maternal mortality .
In Afghan society , discrimination begins at birth .
One obvious reason is that a boy is destined to support his parents and much of his family all his life , and therefore represents a long-term investment , whereas a girl will be given over to her husband ’ s family as soon as possible .
Feeding a girl is seen as effectively looking after someone else ’ s property .
Once , I heard a dreadful story of a breech birth which a traditional midwife did not know how to handle .
In the end , she wrenched the baby ’ s body out , severing it from its head , which remained inside the mother ’ s womb .
It took six days to get the woman to a hospital in Jalalabad though it was not very far from where she lived .
She somehow survived , with major health complications , including permanent fistula , which will condemn her to a life of exclusion from her family and unrelieved misery .
That tragedy can be read on many levels , each more heart-rending than the next .
But note that it occurred near a health facility .
As soon as the midwife saw that the baby was coming out feet forward , she must have known that there was little she could do to save either mother or baby .
Even before that , she would have noticed that the child had not turned properly , and that major problems were on the way .
This means that someone – a husband or mother-in-law – had taken the decision not to send the young woman to the hospital , instead keeping her in inhuman suffering for nearly a week .
The solution is not just to build more hospitals , but also to change deep-rooted disdain for women .
And , sadly , things have become worse in the past 30 years , as Afghanistan ’ s particular brand of Islam , combined with its legacy of dire poverty and war , compounds an already misogynist pre-Islamic tradition .
Maternal mortality is a sinister consequence of this complex situation .
The legal system , schools , and the media could bring change , but no official entity takes the problem seriously enough to initiate effective action .
The central reason is despairingly simple : women ’ s lives are not valued , and even women themselves perceive their suffering as being unavoidable .
What Afghanistan needs is an inquest after each death and laws making it a criminal offense to forbid access to medical aid , when available , to women and children ( or , more correctly , to children and their children , given that girls are often married by age 14 ) .
Prisons , I fear , would be full of abusive husbands and , I regret to say , vengeful mothers-in-law .
Health education through public media , reaching distant areas of the country , is an urgent priority , but has been utterly ignored in favor of commercial priorities .
Questioning culture is , of course , a politically incorrect approach .
But we must refuse to bow before the altar of tolerance when it comes to what is truly unacceptable , wherever it occurs , and this is what the world is witnessing passively in Afghanistan .
Does diversity authorize such brutal deaths and senseless violence against women simply because some supposedly traditional practice allows them to be married before their bodies are ready and denies them health care when they give birth ?
The fight against maternal mortality in Afghanistan must become a global priority .
Ultimately , a society that allows women to be brutalized will remain a breeding ground of generalized violence .
Afghanistan ’ s Feminist Revolution
On April 16 , more than 300 Afghani women – many of them students – marched together in Kabul in protest of a new law passed by Parliament that would impose a series of Taliban-like restrictions on women .
The law would permit marital rape , limit women ’ s movements – say , for work or study – without male permission , and even make it illegal for a woman to refuse to dress as her husband wishes .
The women , facing a crowd of furious men calling them “ whores ” and other epithets , marched two miles under a rain of abuse and delivered their petition against the law to legislators .
Both houses of Parliament had approved the law , and President Hamid Karzai signed it .
The law now affects only the Shia minority , but threatens to affect pending legislation that could restrict the rights of non-Shia women as well .
When Western media sought quotes from the women , they frequently heard a Western-style feminist refrain : “ These laws would make women into a kind of property . ”
In the West , the counterpoint to the notion of woman as property has been a highly individualistic demand for personal autonomy – decision-making based primarily on a woman ’ s own wishes , rather than as wife , mother , community member , or worshipper .
But , while some Western feminist insights may be useful to Afghani women and other women in the developing world as they resist certain forms of male oppression , we should not assume – as Western feminists often have – that our job is to proselytize “ our ” feminism .
On the contrary , the feminism expressed by women such as these Afghani heroines should educate us in the West about our own shortcomings .
The core theory with which emerging feminists in more traditional and religious societies are working is far different from that of Western feminism – and in some ways far more profound and humane .
In India , for example , feminists articulated to me a vision of women ’ s equality that was family-centered rather than self-centered , and that valued service to community rather than personal gratification .
They did not see their struggle as a cultural or ideological clash between men and women , but rather as a very practical effort to live free from violence and sexual assault , forced child marriage and bride-burning , and legal exclusion from parity .
The emerging consensus in India in support of greater rights and freedoms for women , while certainly causing some upheaval and adjustment ( especially within the growing middle classes ) has not yet – and might never – poison the basic trust and warmth between men and women .
Nor does it seem likely to emulate the splintered , individualized , solitary society – and the commodified sexual revolution – that Western , self-based feminism reflects .
This version of feminism – the notion that women can claim equality and still have a valued role in the home , prize family above all , and view rights in the context of community and spirituality – seems like a much-needed corrective to some of Western feminism ’ s shortcomings .
Ideally , men ’ s drive for progress in the developing world would also evolve , uniting the idea of the autonomous self with support for family , community , and other ties , and Western men would learn from this as well .
Moreover , intellectually , these women remind us that Western feminism did not have to evolve the way it did , and can still change and grow to embrace a more satisfying and humane definition of equality .
Simone de Beauvoir , whose seminal book The Second Sex laid the groundwork for post-war Western feminism , was an Existentialist who was neither a wife nor a mother nor a woman of faith .
So her work naturally posited female freedom in a secular , solitary , and individualistic context , in which “ freedom ” means pure autonomy rather than integration within a whole – comprising family , community , and even God – on equal terms .
The good news for all women , East and West , is that President Karzai , under intense international criticism – and not just Western criticism – changed the law less than one week after the march .
This global uproar is a testament to how three decades of Western feminist challenges to leadership have changed the world for the better .
But our ( Western ) moment of feminist leadership is over now – for good reasons .
We know by now what our problems are as women in the West , and we know the blueprint for solving them .
What we lack now is not analysis , but the organizational and political will to do so .
So the leadership role is shifting to women in the developing world .
Their agenda is more pressing , and their problems , frankly , far more serious than ours , which makes it much more urgent for them to develop theories appropriate to the challenges they face .
If one of those courageous Afghan women who marched in Kabul wrote – as I hope she or one of her sisters in the developing world is doing right now – the seminal text for the next 50 years on non-Western feminism , it would no doubt be equality-driven and practical .
And perhaps , in its likely view of the world as being more than the sum of consuming , competing autonomies , or gender warfare , it would be a valuable challenge to truisms that we Western feminists – and the men who love us – have thought we had to take for granted .
Afghanistan ’ s Opium War
When NATO leaders meet for their summit in Riga at the end of this month , there will be a ghost at the feast : Afghanistan ’ s opium .
Afghanistan is in danger of falling back into the hands of terrorists , insurgents , and criminals , and the multi-billion-dollar opium trade is at the heart of the country ’ s malaise .
Indeed , NATO ’ s top general , James Jones , has called drugs the “ Achilles heel ” of Afghanistan .
This year ’ s record harvest of 6,100 tons of opium will generate more than $ 3 billion in illicit revenue – equivalent to almost half of Afghanistan ’ s GDP .
Profits for drug traffickers downstream will be almost 20 times that amount .
Opium money is corrupting Afghan society from top to bottom .
High-level collusion enables thousands of tons of chemical precursors , needed to produce heroin , to be trucked into the country .
Armed convoys transport raw opium around the country unhindered .
Sometimes even army and police vehicles are involved .
Guns and bribes ensure that the trucks are waved through checkpoints .
Opiates flow freely across borders into Iran , Pakistan , and other Central Asian countries .
The opium fields of wealthy landowners are untouched , because local officials are paid off .
Major traffickers never come to trial because judges are bribed or intimidated .
Senior government officials take their cut of opium revenues or bribes in return for keeping quiet .
Perversely , some provincial governors and government officials are themselves major players in the drug trade .
As a result , the Afghan state is at risk of takeover by a malign coalition of extremists , criminals , and opportunists .
Opium is choking Afghan society .
Within Afghanistan , drug addiction is rising .
Neighbors that used to be transit states for drugs are now major consumers , owing to similar dramatic increases in opium and heroin addiction .
Intravenous drug use is spreading HIV / AIDS in Iran , Central Asia , and the former Soviet Union .
In traditional Western European markets , health officials should brace for a rise in the number of deaths from drug overdoses , as this year ’ s bumper opium crop will lead to higher-purity doses of heroin .
What can be done ?
First , the veil of corruption in Afghanistan must be lifted .
Afghans are fed up with arrogant and well-armed tycoons who live in mansions and drive top-of-the range Mercedes limousines – this in a country where barely 13 % of the population have electricity and most people must survive on less than $ 200 a year .
It is time for the Afghan government to name , shame , and sack corrupt officials , arrest major drug traffickers and opium landlords , and seize their assets .
Donors have trained police and prosecutors and built courts and detention centers .
Now it is up to the government to use the judicial system to impose the rule of law .
It will be difficult , but not impossible , to re-establish confidence in the central government .
Putting major drug traffickers behind bars at the new maximum-security prison at Pul-i-Charki , near Kabul , would be a good start .
Of course , Afghanistan does not bear sole responsibility for its plight .
The heroin trade would not be booming if Western governments were serious about combating drug consumption .
It is a bitter irony that the countries whose soldiers ’ lives are on the line in Afghanistan are also the biggest markets for Afghan heroin .
Furthermore , Afghanistan ’ s neighbors must do more to stop insurgents , weapons , money , and chemical precursors from flowing across their borders into the country .
Coalition forces should take a more robust approach to the drug problem .
Counter-insurgency and counter-narcotics are two sides of the same coin .
Improving security and the rule of law must include destroying the opium trade .
Allowing opium traffickers to operate with impunity gives them a free hand to raise money to pay for the arms and fighters battling the Afghan army and NATO forces .
The United Nations Security Council has authorized the International Security Assistance Force to take all necessary measures to fulfill its mandate .
NATO troops should be given the green light to help the Afghan army fight opium – destroy the heroin labs , disband the opium bazaars , attack the opium convoys , and bring the big traders to justice .
And they should be given the tools and manpower to do the job .
There is no point in trying to win the hearts and minds of major drug traffickers .
Farmers are a different story .
Forced eradication risks pushing farmers into the hands of extremists , and thus will not lead to the sustainable reduction of opium fields .
Indeed , as we have seen in some Andean countries , it can be counter-productive .
Therefore , security and development must go hand in hand .
To achieve this , Afghanistan needs more development assistance .
International support so far has been generous , but it is still well below per capita equivalents for other post-conflict situations – and the need is much greater .
Farmers will be weaned off opium over the long term only if they have sustainable livelihoods .
At the moment , Afghanistan ’ s drug lords are prospering , and rural communities are suffering .
That situation needs to be reversed .
We must punish the traffickers and reward the farmers .
We cannot afford to fail in Afghanistan .
Recent history has given us graphic evidence of what would happen if we do .
But any solution in Afghanistan depends on eliminating its opium .
Afghanistan ’ s Suffering Civilians
KABUL – “ The Taliban come to any house they please , by force .
Then they fire from that house , and then ISAF and the Afghan National Army fire at the house .
But if I tell the Taliban not to enter , the Taliban will kill me .
So what is the answer ?
Either ISAF kills me or the Taliban kills me .
The people cannot live like this . ”
That experience , recounted by a resident of Afghanistan ’ s Marja district , is all too frequent in the country .
For three decades , Afghan communities have been caught in the middle of war .
It is long past time for civilians to stop bearing the brunt of it .
Every day , United Nations human-rights workers in Afghanistan meet community members in districts and villages on fact-finding missions into incidents of civilian casualties .
Our recent mid-year report found that 1,462 Afghan civilians were killed in the first half of this year , the highest number since the UN started documenting deaths and injuries of civilians in 2007 .
Fighting continues in Afghanistan , with the surge of the international military forces and Afghan government forces and the spring-summer offensive by the Taliban and other insurgents .
While we are all working to assist in finding an Afghan-led political solution to this conflict , the fighting is not going to stop immediately .
Therefore , it is essential that those fighting take very seriously their obligation not to target civilians – indeed , to do everything possible to protect them .
The Taliban and other insurgents are responsible for nearly 80 % of civilian casualties , so they bear the greatest responsibility to change their behavior .
Insurgents ’ targeted assassinations of civilians , including teachers , government employees , and civilian workers must stop , and the UN has called for these groups to end their use of pressure-plate improvised explosive devices ( IEDs ) , which cause the greatest number of civilian casualties .
As the name suggests , they are triggered indiscriminately by weight – the foot of a child , a teenager ’ s bicycle , or an elderly man walking to market .
As massive anti-personnel mines , these IEDs are illegal and morally indefensible .
While errors by international and government forces are responsible for a far lower rate ( about 14 % ) of civilian casualties , the impact on Afghan communities is no less severe .
Airstrikes by international forces – mainly attacks from helicopters – caused 79 civilian casualties in the first half of 2011 .
Afghans look to their government and the international forces to protect them , so , when awful mistakes occur , the negative impact is doubled .
International forces should therefore continue to strengthen their control systems , particularly with respect to air strikes , in order to minimize the risk of civilian casualties .
Reducing and ultimately eliminating civilian casualties in this war is a moral and legal obligation for all combatants .
Unfortunately , while the frequency of combat-related security incidents may have declined since the 2011 pro-government surge , this has not resulted in a reduction in civilian casualties .
Even beyond their international legal and moral obligation to avoid civilian casualties and protect civilians , the Taliban and other insurgent groups should see that ending civilian casualties is in their own interest .
Killing and maiming men , women , and children can do nothing to further their cause in the eyes of ordinary Afghans .
If the Taliban want to find a legitimate place in Afghan society and political life , stopping the assassinations and use of illegal pressure-plate IEDs would send a powerful message .
We are all aware that an end to the Afghan people ’ s suffering requires an end to the conflict .
Talks , not the killing of civilians , are the way to accomplish this .
Stopping the killing and maiming of civilians is becoming essential and urgent in this effort .
An end to civilian casualties could also help to create an atmosphere in which all sides begin to develop the mutual confidence essential to taking the next step – talking to each other to find a way to end the conflict – an outcome that is both necessary and possible .
The Afghan people deserve nothing less , and they cannot afford to wait any longer .
Afghanistan ’ s Terrorized Women
KABUL – Recently , the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission ( AIHRC ) office in Kudoz province reported the rescue of a young woman who had been imprisoned in her in-laws ’ dungeon for seven months .
Fifteen-year-old Sahar Gul was forced to marry an older man who serves in the Afghan army .
She was then kept in the dungeon by her husband ’ s family and brutally tortured for months , because she refused to work as a prostitute .
Over the past ten years , the AIHRC has received more than 19,000 complaints related to violence against women .
Despite making some progress in investigating the complaints and referring them to the justice system , as well as in raising public awareness about the issue , the challenges remain huge .
Since 2002 , many efforts have been made to improve women ’ s lives in Afghanistan .
The country has enacted several new laws and established a fairly advanced legal framework to end discrimination against women , including a new law that criminalizes any act that results in violence against women .
But laws and policies alone are not sufficient to protect women from horrific domestic abuse .
Indeed , the Gul case is hardly the only well-publicized case .
There was also Gulnaz , a young woman who was jailed for adultery after being raped by a relative ( she was recently released after a presidential pardon , but may be forced to marry her attacker ) .
The husband of another young woman , Aisha , cut off her nose and ears when she ran away .
Violence against women in Afghanistan persists for many reasons .
First , the country has inherited a patriarchal tribal tradition that assumes women ’ s inferiority .
Women are therefore deprived of their basic rights and freedoms .
Second , there is a strong political incentive to deprive women of their rights .
Radical groups receive immense support from the large share of the population that opposes women ’ s rights .
The Taliban , for example , have consistently used an anti-women policy to appeal to tribal and rural people .
Third , family pride and honor are deemed more important than a woman ’ s individual well-being and safety .
For example , if family members beat or abuse a woman , she has few options .
Often , her only choice is to remain silent or risk disgracing the family .
If she does report the matter to the authorities , the case will almost certainly never be properly investigated , nor the perpetrators ever prosecuted .
Gul , for example , complained to the police about her abusive in-laws , but she was returned to the family when some of their influential contacts intervened .
Fourth , laws are often arbitrarily applied , and sharia ( Islamic law ) frequently takes precedence over civil legislation , resulting in widespread impunity for crimes of violence against women .
For example , in October 2010 , the Afghan Supreme Court ruled that women who run away from home can be charged with prostitution , unless they go to the police or an immediate relative &apos;s home . It is this mindset that led to Gul ’ s victimization .
Finally , while the Taliban lost power ten years ago , discrimination and violence against women has occurred in Afghan society for centuries .
Thus , despite some progress , public and official sensitivity to violence against women is only slowly emerging .
The Afghan government must take several steps to protect women fully .
Above all , perpetrators of violence against women should be prosecuted and tried under due process of law .
This will require strengthening the rule of law and ending the prevailing culture of impunity .
That , in turn , requires educating the public further about human rights and women ’ s rights through school textbooks , continuing education courses , and a vigorous media campaign .
It also requires persuading representatives and policymakers to develop policies and allocate budget revenues to combat violence against women , and training police and judges to handle cases of violence against women without deferring to claims of family honor .
Perhaps most importantly , non-constitutional justice systems , such as sharia , must be monitored and checked , if not prohibited altogether .
As for Sahar Gul , her case must be thoroughly investigated , and the police and judiciary must commit to bringing her torturers to justice .
Furthermore , Gul ’ s case , and others like it , should be studied in order to understand the roots of such crimes .
Until Afghanistan ’ s leaders begin to address this problem seriously , our country will continue to bear the scar of violence against women on its face .
Obama ’ s Bitter Afghan Legacy
BERLIN – Nearly 15 years after its launch , the United States ’ war in Afghanistan is still raging , making it the longest war in American history .
Nowadays , the war is barely on the world ’ s radar , with only dramatic developments , like America ’ s recent drone-strike assassination of Afghan Taliban Chief Akhtar Mohammad Mansour , getting airtime .
But Afghans continue to lose their friends , neighbors , and children to conflict , as they have since the 1979 Soviet invasion , which triggered the refugee exodus that brought the parents of Omar Mateen , the killer of 49 people in a nightclub in Orlando , to the US .
America ’ s invasion , launched by former President George W. Bush in the wake of the September 11 , 2001 , terror attacks , was intended to dismantle Al Qaeda and remove the Taliban from power , thereby ensuring that Afghanistan would no longer serve as a safe base of operations for extremists .
With those goals ostensibly accomplished , Bush ’ s successor , Barack Obama , reduced troop levels in the country , even declaring a year and a half ago that the war was “ coming to a responsible conclusion . ”
But , with a resurgent Taliban stepping up attacks , the war has raged on , exacting staggering costs in blood and treasure .
One key reason is Pakistan , which has harbored the Afghan Taliban ’ s command and control , while pretending to be a US ally .
If there were any doubts about Pakistan ’ s duplicity , they should have been eliminated in 2011 , when Osama bin Laden was killed in a military garrison town near the country ’ s capital .
Yet , five years later , Pakistan still has not revealed who helped bin Laden hide for all those years .
Meanwhile , the Obama administration has continued to shower the country with billions of dollars in aid .
The assassination of Mansour on Pakistan ’ s territory , near its border with Iran and Afghanistan , has exposed , yet again , the deceitfulness of Pakistani officials , who have repeatedly denied sheltering Taliban leaders .
Like the raid by US Navy SEALs that killed bin Laden , Mansour ’ s assassination required the US to violate the sovereignty of a country that , as one of the largest recipients of American aid , should have been supporting the effort .
The question is whether the US will acknowledge the obvious lesson this time and change course .
While Mansour ’ s killing may be , as Obama put it , “ an important milestone ” in the effort to bring peace to Afghanistan , it also exposed America ’ s policy failures under the Obama administration , rooted in the desire not to confront either Pakistan or even the Taliban too strongly .
Obama ’ s objective was to preserve the option of reaching a Faustian bargain with the Taliban – a power-sharing arrangement to underpin a peace deal – facilitated by the Pakistani military .
That is why the US has not branded the Afghan Taliban – much less Pakistan ’ s rogue intelligence agency , Inter-Services Intelligence ( ISI ) – a terrorist organization , and instead has engaged in semantic jugglery .
This approach goes beyond rhetoric .
America took almost 15 years to carry out its first drone strike in Pakistan ’ s sprawling Balochistan province , even though the Afghan Taliban leadership established its command-and-control structure there almost immediately after the US military intervention ousted it from Afghanistan .
Instead , the US concentrated its drone strikes in Pakistan ’ s Waziristan region , allowing the Taliban leaders to remain ensconced .
The US has even made direct overtures to the Taliban , in order to promote negotiations aimed at securing peace through a power-sharing arrangement .
It allowed the Taliban to set up a de facto diplomatic mission in Doha , Qatar , in 2013 .
A year later , it traded five senior Taliban leaders who had been jailed at Guantánamo Bay for a captured US Army sergeant .
What the US did not know was that the Taliban ’ s founder , Mullah Mohammed Omar , died in 2013 in a hospital in the Pakistani city of Karachi .
Omar ’ s death was kept secret for more than two years , during which time ISI claimed to be facilitating contacts with him .
Finally , last July , Mansour was installed as the Taliban ’ s new leader – and he was not interested in peace talks .
It was Mansour ’ s intransigence that spurred the US to change its tactics .
Instead of using carrots to secure Taliban support for a peace deal , the Obama administration is now using very large sticks .
But even if this approach manages to bring the Taliban to the negotiating table , it will probably not be enough to secure a lasting peace deal .
If the US is to succeed at ending the war in Afghanistan , it must do more than change tactics ; it must rethink its fundamental strategy .
The reality is that the medieval Taliban will neither be defeated nor seek peace until their Pakistani sanctuaries are eliminated .
No counterterrorism campaign has ever succeeded in a country when the militants have found refuge in another .
While Obama recognizes the imperative of eliminating terrorist sanctuaries , he has failed to do what is needed .
Simply put , bribing Pakistan ’ s military will not work .
Over the last 14 years , the US has given Pakistan more than $ 33 billion in aid and armed it with lethal weapons , ranging from F-16s and P-3C Orion maritime aircraft to Harpoon anti-ship missiles and TOW anti-armor missiles .
And yet Pakistan continues to provide the Afghan Taliban a safe haven within its borders .
A better approach would be to link aid disbursement to concrete Pakistani action against militants , while officially classifying ISI as a terrorist entity .
Such a move would send a strong signal to Pakistan ’ s military – which views the Taliban and other militant groups as useful proxies and force multipliers vis-à-vis Afghanistan and India – that it can no longer hunt with the hounds and run with the foxes .
Obama ’ s decision last October to prolong indefinitely US involvement in Afghanistan means not only that he will leave office without fulfilling his promise to end Bush-era military entanglements , but also that the US will continue to fight the war on the wrong side of the Afghan-Pakistani border .
Perhaps his successor will finally recognize the truth : the end of the war in Afghanistan lies in Pakistan .
A Field Guide to Israeli Hawks
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon &apos;s announcement that he plans to dismantle Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip , as well as some settlements in the West Bank , has shocked and caught people off guard both in Israel and around the world .
Many denounced Sharon &apos;s plan as a trick .
But that surprise was wrong-headed from the start .
Despite the way it often looks to outsiders , debates in Israel about the future of the occupied territories have never been confined to hawks and doves .
Like everything in Israel , the process is more complicated , especially where the hawks are concerned .
Basically , there are two species of Israeli hawks : call one kind ideological and the other strategic .
Ideological hawks view the occupied territories as an integral part of the historical Land of Israel , the homeland of the Jewish people .
For them , the territories are part of the Jewish patrimony , which is why they insist on referring to the West Bank by its Hebrew historical appellation - Judea and Samaria .
Not all ideological hawks are religious , although those who are base their claim on divine promises and prophecies .
But many ideological hawks are secular nationalists , and their jargon is similar to that of typical Central and Eastern European nationalists .
Former Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir belonged to that category .
Ideological hawks usually come from the National-Religious Party and from members of the Likud .
They are inspired by the nationalist ideology connected with Vladimir Jabotinsky , who founded &quot; Revisionist &quot; Zionism as a challenge to the more moderate version espoused by Israel &apos;s Founding Fathers like Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion .
Then there are the strategic hawks .
For them , given Israel &apos;s narrow and vulnerable geographic shape and continuing Arab enmity , controlling the West Bank and Gaza is not an ideological imperative , but is driven by security considerations .
For them , Jewish settlements in the territories are not a return to historical lands , but security outposts , aimed at preventing - or repelling from a better strategic position - an attack on the Israeli heartland .
They may be right or wrong in this assessment , but it is not an ideological one .
Ariel Sharon , who comes from a military background - he grew up in a social milieu much nearer to Labor than to Jabotinsky &apos;s ideas - is a strategic hawk .
For ideological hawks , compromises are treason : how can you jeopardize the historical patrimony of the Jewish people , let alone God &apos;s promise to Abraham ?
Strategic hawks , however , are open to practical bargains and compromises - if the circumstances are right and if the security considerations justify it in their eyes .
It is in this context that Sharon &apos;s moves should be seen .
He was elected on the promise that he would bring peace and security .
He has brought neither .
With the defeat and demise of Saddam Hussein , the danger of an &quot; Eastern front &quot; against Israel has diminished .
Absent a Palestinian partner , and given continuing Palestinian terrorism - which Israel &apos;s harsh responses fail to quell - what Sharon appears to be doing now follows from his strategic-oriented thinking : set up an effective barrier , move some of the isolated and strategically untenable settlements , and wait for another day .
If one follows Sharon &apos;s statements in the last year , a clear pattern emerges .
First , he admitted that &quot; eventually &quot; a Palestinian state would emerge - something unthinkable for dyed-in-the-wool ideological hawks .
A few months later , he scandalized his own Likud party conference by stating that occupation is wrong and untenable - another shock for those who always speak of &quot; liberated &quot; rather than &quot; occupied &quot; territories .
Last December , he explicitly stated that Israel is headed towards unilateral disengagement , and that this would entail the &quot; relocation &quot; of some settlements .
Although this was still merely verbiage , it was novel language for a Likud prime minister .
Sharon &apos;s latest statements , though , explicitly specified the settlements to be evacuated ; the Director of the National Security Council , General Giora Eiland , was appointed to chair an inter-ministerial Relocation Committee and work out plans for conducting the evacuations , including compensation for relocated settlers .
All of this has radically altered Israel &apos;s domestic political map .
Some ideological hawks in Sharon &apos;s government threatened to resign ; Shimon Peres announced that Labor will offer Sharon a parliamentary safety net ; there is even talk about Labor joining a national unity government .
The test , of course , is not in the planning , but in the implementation of withdrawal , and the road is long and bumpy .
Sharon &apos;s timing may have been determined by his problems with police investigations into alleged corruption .
Yet anyone who would like to predict Sharon &apos;s future behavior should remember that unlike Begin and Shamir , Sharon comes from the military , and for him security - not ideology - is supreme .
So his apparent pragmatism should come as no surprise .
Feminizing the Command Line
BRUSSELS – This year , International Women ’ s Day is focused on “ inspiring change ” and challenging the status quo to achieve gender equity worldwide .
The sad reality is that , despite significant social , political , and economic progress , women still face major personal and professional obstacles in developed and developing countries alike .
This state of affairs does not hurt only women ; it undermines everyone ’ s prospects .
Consider the information and communications technology sector , which is critical to the future competitiveness of major economies – particularly Europe ’ s .
With application-software development alone capable of employing 4.8 million people and contributing € 63 billion ( $ 87 billion ) to the European Union ’ s economy by 2018 , enabling women to contribute to the ICT sector ’ s development is a matter of common sense .
The good news is that the European Commission seems to recognize this imperative .
Having identified technological progress as one of the most important sources of growth and employment , the Commission has specified 101 policy measures – including programs aimed at increasing women ’ s participation in the ICT workforce – to deliver sustainable GDP growth through digital technologies .
But much more must be done .
Despite stubbornly high unemployment levels across Europe – more than 10 % of the working-age population and over 20 % of young people remain unemployed , according to Eurostat – up to a half-million vacancies are expected in the technology sector by next year .
This gap can be explained largely by students ’ belief that a career in technology is not a viable option – a view that is particularly prevalent among women .
Indeed , outdated cultural norms and stereotypes – such as the idea that science , technology , engineering , and mathematics are “ for boys ” – continue to prevent women from pursuing ICT-based careers .
As a result , only 2.9 % of bachelors or first degrees held by European women are ICT-based , compared to 9.5 % for men .
To be sure , there are women who are working hard to challenge the stereotypes .
For example , earlier this week , at Microsoft ’ s annual AppCup competition , which gives European developers and young entrepreneurs the opportunity to showcase their skills , two promising female developers ranked among the 13 finalists – a major accomplishment , given that this year ’ s contest attracted 200 submissions from 31 countries .
Andreea Pleșea , a business software developer from Romania , submitted Mobile Gamification – an app that motivates employees by providing incentives for participation , engagement , and loyalty among team members to achieve specific business goals .
And France ’ s Dominique Sauquet presented Dynseo , which allows health-care professionals to administer the full battery of cognitive tests needed to assess cognitive impairment and memory loss in the elderly .
But Pleșea and Sauquet remain the exception .
Women account for only 9 % of developers in Europe ’ s booming app industry , and comprise only 30 % of workers in the broader ICT sector .
Underrepresentation of women in the sector is damaging its competitiveness and impeding Europe ’ s return to growth .
According to the European Commission , if as many women participated in the ICT workforce as men , Europe ’ s annual GDP could increase by € 9 billion .
Moreover , given that organizations with more women in management achieve a 35 % higher return on equity and 34 % better total return to shareholders than their counterparts , greater gender parity would be a boon for the sector .
More important , women ’ s exclusion from the ICT sector is a disservice to thousands of talented young people like Pleșea and Sauquet .
It is also simply bad business : Consider the millions of potential customers whose ways of living , working , and playing might be transformed by these women ’ s ideas .
Addressing the technology sector ’ s gender gap must begin at the university level , with a diverse range of students – especially women – being encouraged to pursue tech studies .
At the same time , initiatives like Web-based training , game-based eLearning , and social networking – as proposed by the European Commission – could help motivate women to enter or return to the ICT workforce .
It is time to welcome many more women into the ICT sector .
Europe ’ s future competitiveness depends on it .
A Flat World and a Round Ball
With the final stage of the World Cup approaching , now is a good opportunity for a mid-tournament appraisal .
This year ’ s Cup , unlike the previous one in Japan and South Korea in 2002 , didn ’ t witness any real upsets in the first round .
Switzerland and Australia surprisingly reached the elimination round , and the Asian and African teams disappointed somewhat , with only Ghana advancing .
There have been just two ugly matches so far , full of fouls , nasty attacks , and unnecessary aggression , as well as numerous yellow and red cards : Italy vs. the US , and Portugal vs. the Netherlands .
Otherwise , we ’ re experiencing a wonderful Cup in Germany , in terms of both sportsmanship and the overall atmosphere .
As for Germany and the Germans , one hardly recognizes one ’ s own country and people .
Even Mother Nature has played along .
After a long winter and a non-existent spring , summer started promptly with the first kick-off – and virtually overnight , Germany has flaunted its sunniest and most delightful side .
The weather is Mediterranean , and all of a sudden , so are the people .
